Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa's unceremonious takeoff from the nation on Wednesday (July 13) to elude rampaging swarms of road nonconformists has shades of so-called "Individuals Control" insurgencies in other parts of Asia.

Here's a see at a few of them - a few were effective, whereas others were smashed by the powers of the day.

A despot removed

On four pivotal days in February 1986, millions of Filipinos focalized on Epifanio de los Santos Road in Metro Manila, and in cities all over the nation, to dissent against the tyranny of President Ferdinand Marcos.

The Individuals Control Transformation, because it was known, started as a reaction to the fixed result of snap decisions called within the nation - in which Mr Marcos called himself the victor - but developed into a showdown between unarmed civilians and protected tanks.

It finished in Mr Marcos and his family escaping into oust in Hawaii.

Myanmar's 8888 rebellion

A arrangement of across the nation challenges in 1988 against the military administration, started by understudies, saw the development of popular government symbol Aung San Suu Kyi. Moreover known as the 8888 Rebellion since understudies had arranged a across the country dissent on Aug 8 that year, it finished in disappointment.

Be that as it may, Ms Suu Kyi and her party, the National Alliance for Majority rule government (NLD), would go on to win decisions in 1990. The military junta denied to perceive the comes about and she was put beneath house capture until 2010.

The NLD won races in 2015 and this time was able to create a government. But the military seized control final year after its party misplaced severely within the 2020 races. Ms Suu Kyi remains in detainment.

Drop of Suharto

After 31 a long time of dictator run the show, Indonesian President Suharto was constrained to step down in 1998 taking after distress brought on by financial hardships caused by the 1997 Asian money related emergency.

Mr Suharto had sought to cling on to control in spite of gigantic riots within the capital Jakarta and ran unopposed for re-election in Walk 1998.

This driven to advance challenges, and to maintain a strategic distance from a conceivable gracious war, he ventured down in May.

Malaysia's Bersih

The Consolidation for Clean and Reasonable Races, too known as Bersih ("clean"), was a dissent development that looked for to change the appointive framework in Malaysia, to bring approximately free and reasonable races.

Whereas it fizzled to attain its unique objective of changing the constituent framework, the development had a critical affect on Malaysian legislative issues. Its to begin with rally in November 2007, where around 40,000 supporters wore yellow T-shirts as a image of protest, is regularly credited with leading to a shift within the political landscape within the 2008 decision. In that decision, Barisan Nasional, which Bersih accused of constituent extortion, fizzled to win a two-thirds supermajority for the primary time.

Bersih has proceeded to campaign for discretionary change.

Yellow shirt, ruddy shirt

Thailand's so-called "yellow shirts" are a free gathering of royalists, ultra-nationalists and the urban center lesson who brought almost the destruction of previous prime serve Thaksin Shinawatra by holding enormous road challenges in 2006, inciting the military to organize a upset.

When Mr Thaksin's partners won post-coup decisions in 2007, the yellow shirts came out on the roads once more until Thailand's protected court prohibited his party for decision offenses.

The "ruddy shirts", in differentiate, are supporters of Mr Thaksin and his partners, and started their claim dissents when the 2007 race result was tossed out. They arranged rough challenges in 2009 and 2010, involving Bangkok's memorable and commercial locale, as well as a military base, without victory.

Umbrella insurgency

Hong Kong's umbrella development of 2014 is so named since of the umbrellas that dissidents, primarily understudies, used to secure themselves against the tear gas and pepper splash police utilized on them.

The 79-day generally quiet occupation of a few of the busiest parts of the city to demand true all inclusive suffrage finished in failure, presaging the more savage dissents of 2019.

The 2019 dissents started in resistance to a Charge that would have permitted the removal of Hong Kongers to China and broadened to incorporate other requests such as all inclusive suffrage. From June 2019 to early 2020, Hong Kongers took to the boulevards, with the dissents now and then turning rough.

To suppress the turmoil, Beijing ordered the national security law that has seen numerous activists captured. This and appointive changes fixed Beijing's hold over the semi-autonomous Chinese city. 