BOAO, Hainan - Prime Serve Lee Hsien Loong and Malaysian Prime Serve Anwar Ibrahim on Thursday reaffirmed the near ties shared by both nations at a reciprocal assembly held on the sidelines of the Boao Gathering for Asia Yearly Conference in Hainan, China.

Amid the assembly, the two pioneers surveyed the advance both nations have made in respective participation, taking after Datuk Seri Anwar's visit to Singapore in January. It was Mr Anwar's to begin with visit to the Republic after he was sworn in as Malaysia's 10th prime serve in November 2022.

PM Lee and Mr Anwar had seen at that point the marking of three assentions for Malaysia and Singapore to fortify respective participation and together seize openings within the advanced economy and green economy. The nations too concurred to work closely on information security and cyber security.

After the reciprocal assembly on Thursday, Mr Anwar posted on Facebook saying that he trusts the near relationship between Singapore and Malaysia will gotten to be more grounded. PM Lee too posted on Facebook that he had a productive catch-up with Mr Anwar.

PM Lee, who arrived in Beijing on Thursday evening and was invited by Vice-Foreign Serve Sun Weidong, included that he was happy to see individual pioneers and companions, counting Chinese Head Li Qiang and Boao Gathering for Asia chairman Boycott Ki-moon, at the yearly conference.

He included that he is looking forward to assembly Chinese President Xi Jinping to extend two-sided ties and participation between Singapore and China. PM Lee and Mr Xi are anticipated to meet on Friday.

Some time recently his flight to Beijing, PM Lee had a isolated assembly with Mr Feng Fei, Communist Party chief of Hainan, where they talked about financial improvements in Singapore and Hainan, and investigated collaboration openings. They too examined having Singapore as a dispatch cushion for companies in Hainan to wander into South-east Asia, in a move to extend financial trades.

PM Lee, at the side Mr Anwar and other pioneers who talked at the Boao entire, moreover gone to a lunch facilitated by Chief Li. 