Up to 50 million people in 45 countries are on the edge of famine and risk being tipped over without humanitarian support, according to the World Food Programme (WFP).

"Over 880,000 are struggling for survival in famine-like conditions in five countries - Afghanistan, Ethiopia (based on a 2021 assessment), Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen - that's 10 times more than five years ago," WFP regional communications officer Alessandro Abbonizio told The Straits Times from Kenya.

In the Horn of Africa region - which encompasses Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia - a severe drought caused by four consecutive failed rainy seasons has so far killed over seven million livestock.

Mr Abbonizio said that threatens to push the number of food insecure people due to drought to over 20 million if urgent humanitarian relief is not received.

"Families are taking desperate measures to survive, with 1.1 million people across the Horn of Africa displaced due to drought. There are seven million malnourished children across the region, with 1.5 million children under the age of five in Somalia alone - 45 per cent of all children in the country - facing malnutrition by the end of 2022," Mr Abbonizio said.

Funding shortfalls have forced the WFP to prioritise who receives assistance and who goes hungry.

In Somalia for example, the WFP has had to focus on treating malnutrition instead of preventing it, which will be more costly in the long term.

The WFP is also concerned that a potential fifth consecutive failed rainy season has already been forecast for October to December, which could result in needs being outstripped by available resources.

The security situation in parts of Somalia has complicated aid agencies' efforts to distribute humanitarian aid in the country.

Large numbers of people affected by the drought were caught in these areas and were being forced to flee because there was no aid reaching them.

"That puts even more strain on our operations on reaching the people who need aid the most. The most vulnerable are those whom we aren't yet seeing and that are left behind. And that's just a tragic situation," said Mr Karl Schembri, the Norwegian Refugee Council's regional media adviser for East Africa and Yemen.

UN Food and Agriculture Organisation head of strategy and resource mobilisation Ariane Luff said that while drought was driving all of the new displacement, the conflict was at times caused by lack of access to natural resources like water.

"This is why it's important we look not just at the short-term effects of climate change but also that we identify and invest in longer term solutions to address the drivers of the conflict and food insecurity," she said.