Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa's unceremonious departure from the country on Wednesday (July 13) to escape rampaging mobs of street protesters has shades of so-called "People Power" revolutions in other parts of Asia.

Here's a look at some of them - some were successful, while others were crushed by the powers of the day.

A dictator deposed

On four momentous days in February 1986, millions of Filipinos converged on Epifanio de los Santos Avenue in Metro Manila, and in cities all over the country, to protest against the dictatorship of President Ferdinand Marcos.

The People Power Revolution, as it was known, began as a response to the rigged result of snap elections called in the country - in which Mr Marcos called himself the victor - but grew into a confrontation between unarmed civilians and armoured tanks.

It culminated in Mr Marcos and his family fleeing into exile in Hawaii.

Myanmar's 8888 uprising

A series of nationwide protests in 1988 against the military regime, initiated by students, saw the emergence of democracy icon Aung San Suu Kyi. Also known as the 8888 Uprising because students had planned a nationwide protest on Aug 8 that year, it ended in failure.

However, Ms Suu Kyi and her party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), would go on to win elections in 1990. The military junta refused to recognise the results and she was placed under house arrest until 2010.

The NLD won elections in 2015 and this time was able to form a government. But the military seized power last year after its party lost badly in the 2020 elections. Ms Suu Kyi remains in detention.

Fall of Suharto

After 31 years of authoritarian rule, Indonesian President Suharto was forced to step down in 1998 following unrest brought on by economic hardships caused by the 1997 Asian financial crisis.

Mr Suharto had sought to cling on to power despite massive riots in the capital Jakarta and ran unopposed for re-election in March 1998.

This led to further protests, and to avoid a possible civil war, he stepped down in May.

Malaysia's Bersih

The Coalition for Clean and Fair Elections, also known as Bersih ("clean"), was a protest movement that sought to reform the electoral system in Malaysia, to bring about free and fair elections.

While it failed to achieve its original goal of reforming the electoral system, the movement had a significant impact on Malaysian politics. Its first rally in November 2007, where around 40,000 supporters wore yellow T-shirts as a symbol of protest, is often credited with leading to a shift in the political landscape in the 2008 election. In that election, Barisan Nasional, which Bersih accused of electoral fraud, failed to win a two-thirds supermajority for the first time.

Bersih has continued to campaign for electoral reform.

Yellow shirt, red shirt

Thailand's so-called "yellow shirts" are a loose grouping of royalists, ultra-nationalists and the urban middle class who brought about the downfall of former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra by holding massive street protests in 2006, prompting the military to stage a coup.

When Mr Thaksin's allies won post-coup elections in 2007, the yellow shirts came out on the streets again until Thailand's constitutional court banned his party for election misdemeanours.

The "red shirts", in contrast, are supporters of Mr Thaksin and his allies, and initiated their own protests when the 2007 election result was thrown out. They staged violent protests in 2009 and 2010, occupying Bangkok's historic and commercial districts, as well as a military base, without success.

Umbrella revolution

Hong Kong's umbrella movement of 2014 is so named because of the umbrellas that protesters, mainly students, used to protect themselves against the tear gas and pepper spray police used on them.

The 79-day largely peaceful occupation of some of the busiest parts of the city to demand true universal suffrage ended in failure, presaging the more violent protests of 2019.

The 2019 protests began in opposition to a Bill that would have allowed the extradition of Hong Kongers to China and broadened to include other demands such as universal suffrage. From June 2019 to early 2020, Hong Kongers took to the streets, with the protests sometimes turning violent.

To quell the unrest, Beijing enacted the national security law that has seen many activists arrested. This and electoral changes tightened Beijing's grip over the semi-autonomous Chinese city.