DOHA, Qatar - The Americans are talking to the Iranians, who are talking to the Saudis, who, in turn, are talking to the Israelis. Anyone who follows Middle Eastern affairs is likely to feel slightly bewildered by the sheer scale of current regional political activity. A region where rivals often refused to acknowledge one another’s existence is now a hive of diplomatic activity where everyone talks to everyone.

At first sight, a positive development; no good can ever come from refusing to talk to one’s neighbours, however objectionable one may consider them. And there is no doubt that, as a result, countries in the Middle East are exploring new and potentially radical approaches to some ancient problems.

Still, it remains to be seen whether the current diplomatic effort results in a fundamental change of direction for the Middle East or is merely a lull before a return to regional confrontations.

Iran’s diplomatic overtures

Iran is the best regional example of the danger that peaceful moves now can still give way to major future crises. For years, the country was locked in a bitter confrontation with the United States and pro-Western governments in the Middle East, particularly Saudi Arabia. For most of the region’s states, no other country had the potential to be more disruptive than Iran, with its proxy armies such as Hamas in the Gaza Strip, Hizbollah in Lebanon and Syria, and the Houthis in Yemen, to name but a few.

Yet, over the past few months, the Iranians have moved away from the language of confrontation. With China’s mediation, they signed a deal to resume diplomatic relations with Saudi Arabia; the two countries have just reopened their respective embassies in each other’s capitals. And not a day goes by without another offer of peaceful cooperation from Iran; most recently, General Abbas Nilforoushan, one of the top commanders of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, offered to share medical services with Iran’s Arab neighbours.

The Saudis, eager to extricate themselves from an unwinnable war in Yemen and other skirmishes elsewhere in the Middle East, have responded positively to Iran’s diplomatic offers. But, as all the regional actors know, Iran’s new cooperative mood is designed to win the country time as it approaches the moment of becoming a nuclear state.

The administration of US President Joe Biden has spent time trying to revive a nuclear deal with Iran that was initially negotiated in 2015 by President Barack Obama but repudiated in 2018 by the Trump administration. Washington’s effort predictably failed; Iran and the US have had no contact since 2022.

The nuclear question

Meanwhile, the Islamic Republic of Iran has been multiplying the number and power of its centrifuges. Today, it produces uranium enriched up to 60 per cent, far beyond anything required for peaceful uses. It would take two weeks, or at most, up to a month, for Iran to reach the 90 per cent needed for weapons-grade uranium.

Historically, most countries aspiring to join the nuclear club have worked on producing fissile material and developing a delivery system in parallel and more or less at the same time. But Iran is an anomaly in this respect: It froze its nuclear weapon delivery programme two decades ago, and since then, it has concentrated almost entirely on the uranium enrichment objective.

This raises the possibility that Iran may choose to remain a so-called “threshold” nuclear state, namely one that has mastered the entire uranium enrichment cycle but does not have a weapon. “To transform the bomb into a weapon and complete its adaptation to a nuclear warhead for a missile – about two more years are needed,” observes Israeli General Oren Setter, who has spent most of his professional life following Iran’s nuclear development.

The Biden administration has vowed that it won’t allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapon. But it does not wish to face a military confrontation at this stage, and certainly not before 2024’s US presidential elections. Hence, Washington is eager to believe Iran may be content to remain just a nuclear threshold state.

Thus, in March, when the US chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Mark Milley, faced a hearing before the US House of Representatives in Washington, he said the US “remains committed, in its policy, to ensuring that Iran does not have a fielded nuclear weapon”, a fine distinction indicating that the US may well be content to live with a nuclear-capable Iran, provided it does not deploy a weapon.

Indeed, secret negotiations are ongoing between the US and Iran through an intermediary for an agreement under which Iran agrees to freeze its nuclear programme while maintaining sufficient fissile material to manufacture one basic nuclear bomb and, in return, the US would free up around US$20 billion (S$26.4 billion) worth of Iranian assets currently frozen in foreign banks.

For the moment, it’s hard to say whether Iran will accept such a deal. But as they make the last steps towards becoming a nuclear-capable state, it suits the Iranians to reassure their Arab neighbours. That is the main reason for all the current sweet-talking from Teheran.

The snag is that this reassurance can only be temporary, even if Iran agrees not to deploy a nuclear weapon. Nobody in the Middle East believes Iran will remain a threshold state for many years without getting a delivery system.

In any case, ensuring that Iran respects a pledge to stay just a threshold nuclear state will be complicated. While there are plenty of technical means to detect a uranium enrichment programme, it’s much harder to detect development in delivery systems.

In short, while it is possible that, as it sits on the nuclear threshold, Iran now feels secure enough to engage more constructively with its Middle Eastern Arab neighbours, it is just as likely that the current cooperative mood from Iran will be short-lived.

The Israeli exception

But while Iran is at least trying to make some helpful noises, Israel is the only Middle Eastern country bucking the trend by moving away from regional cooperation. Since it came to power in December 2022, the far-right coalition government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has pursued two objectives: dismantling the country’s judicial system and destroying the last vestiges of credibility of the Palestinian Authority, the political body representing Palestinians living in the occupied territories.

Mr Netanyahu claims to be the chief architect of the so-called Abraham Accords that normalised Israel’s diplomatic relations with Gulf countries such as the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. However, the Israeli leader’s policies in the occupied territories make it extremely difficult for Gulf states to conduct normal relations with Israel, and make it virtually impossible for Saudi Arabia to join the Abraham Accords.

Thus, when the opportunities for dialogue in the Middle East could not have been more enticing, the leader of the one state that has always complained about being isolated in its region is now contributing to his and his country’s isolation.

Until now, the wisdom in Israel was that while all Israeli leaders have had occasional differences with the US, no Israeli government can afford a prolonged confrontation with Washington. Prime Minister Netanyahu appears to be challenging even this last taboo in Israeli politics.

He has yet to receive his invitation to visit the White House, a stinging rebuke of a kind not administered against any other Israeli prime minister. Half of Mr Netanyahu’s Cabinet was not invited to attend the US Independence Day celebrations at the US embassy in Jerusalem this year, yet another unprecedented American warning.

Yet, most of the ministers in Mr Netanyahu’s Cabinet don’t seem to care; they are seized by a messianic zeal to incorporate all the occupied Palestinian lands, and the belief that the Arab world needs Israel more than Israel needs the Arab world.

Saudi reforms

But probably the most noteworthy current development for the region is Saudi Arabia’s renewed determination to reform its economic and political institutions. Observers outside the Middle East often dismiss Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman as being too inexperienced, too impulsive, and often impetuous.

But inside his kingdom – the region’s largest and wealthiest – the 37-year-old Crown Prince is genuinely popular with his country’s youthful population precisely because he is tackling Saudi Arabia’s existential problems: an economic diversification away from dependence on oil revenues, and freeing the country’s social and political life from the oppressive control of religious fundamentalists.

Success is far from guaranteed; the history of the Middle East in general, and the Gulf in particular, is littered with previous reform plans that went nowhere. Still, in visiting the region, it is impossible not to be impressed by the strong undercurrents of Saudi change, from creating new holiday resorts and a new airline to attract tourists, to massive programmes to reskill the country’s population.

Nor should one forget that political elites throughout the Gulf have realised that they have not more than two decades to wean themselves from oil and gas revenues before these commodities cease to be significant revenue-earners. The battle is no longer one of choice but of survival.

In one way or another, all the countries of the Middle East are adjusting to a new regional architecture, one in which the US is no longer the predominant power, but other global powers – such as Russia or China – neither have the wherewithal nor inclination to replace the US.

The new, rising Middle East may not be more peaceful. But it is becoming a region with at least a greater readiness to avoid direct conflict. And one in which alliances and cooperative arrangements are put together and dismantled at great speed.
