WANNING, Hainan - Graphic designer Sikey Shi, 23, visited Riyuewan on Hainan island in November 2020 hoping to find out more about surfing, a sport he had never tried but had been following on social media because it looked “cool”.

Unexpectedly, he fell so deeply in love with the sport and Riyuewan that he headed straight back to the tropical bay after completing his degree in 2021 and stayed put.

His 15 days in south-eastern Jiangsu province to spend Chinese New Year with his family in January was his first trip back in two years.

“I was drawn to the carefree way of life here, where the pressures of city living are so far behind me,” Mr Shi told The Straits Times at his workplace – a cafe in Riyuewan – in February 2023. “I have also found my passion in surfing, which I hope to continue with in the future.”

Wanning city’s Riyuewan, also called Sun and Moon Bay, has emerged as a destination for young Chinese who are looking to tang ping or “lie flat” – which is basically taking a break from the country’s pressure-cooker environment.

Tang ping is the counter-movement to the “996” lifestyle rampant in first-tier cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, where employees are known to work from 9am to 9pm, six days a week.

Besides reeling in those in search of a slower pace of life, Riyuewan – a 4.5km stretch on the south-eastern coast, with warm, crystal clear waters and consistent swells from the South China Sea – has become China’s top spot for surfers.

A surf coach, who goes by the nickname Liu Liu, said the urge to escape Suzhou’s wintry cold led him to Riyuewan in December 2020. He had also wanted to pick up surfing, which he had tried once in the coastal city of Qingdao.

He found a volunteer position as a driver at a surf club, and decided to stay on after the month-long stint ended as he had acculturated to the bay’s relaxing lifestyle. He became a coach after three months of surfing, with his employer helping him through theory and practical tests.

“I was not happy at my previous job, where I worked in sales and coaching in the youth sports sector. I had to do a lot of entertaining and my sleeping hours were very erratic, which was bad for my health. The work was also very stressful,” Liu Liu, 30, said.

“I put on a lot of weight at my last job and didn’t even feel like getting out of bed. Society kept telling me that the stress was part of the life that I was meant to lead, but I tried and I really could not keep it up.

“My time in Riyuewan has given me the space to breathe,” he said, adding that he has lost 10kg since moving to Riyuewan, thanks to the slower and healthier pace of life.

He now relishes his simple daily routine: “I’ll make breakfast when I wake up and check out the waves to see if the tide is good for surfing, or go to class if there are students for the day. Otherwise, I’ll spend my day at home, where I have my meals on time. At night, sometimes I meet my friends for a drink and chat.” 

Surf school owner Zhang Wei credits variety programme Summer Surf Shop for the groundswell of surf fans. The show, which aired in 2020, featured top Chinese celebrity Wang Yibo riding the waves.

A day after the episode aired, sign-ups for surfing lessons jumped to about 300, said Mr Zhang, who runs six Shaka Surf Club outlets in Hainan, including one in Riyuewan. His school in Riyuewan can take a maximum of 80 students a day.

“Many of our students had come to learn to surf because they saw how fun it looked on social media,” he added.

The 36-year-old said the knock-on effect of China’s zero-Covid policy contributed to Riyuewan’s popularity.

With borders closed, young Chinese had limited options for holiday or tang ping destinations. Those who came to try out surfing inspired others to do so, and many ended up taking a longer break than they had expected in the bay area.

Mr Shi, the graphic designer, said he had started questioning whether it was necessary to abide by society’s expectations of finding a job in a big city after graduating, after spending a month in Riyuewan working as a volunteer photographer. 

Mr Shi, who studied animation at a university in Nanjing, added: “Initially, my plan, just like everyone else’s, was to find a job after graduation, make money, return to my home town to retire; but after coming here, I realised money is not as important as having fun and keeping an open mind.”

He said that he has also found greater self-acceptance in Riyuewan. For example, he has chosen to grow out his curly hair, something that he was embarrassed by during his younger years.

“I used to shave my head when I was in secondary school because my hair was very unruly. Once, during morning assembly, a junior pointed at me and called me ‘Baldie’. I’ve felt very ashamed about my curly hair my whole life,” he said. 

His frizzy hair now reaches his jawline and he doesn’t feel judged by the people around him. “They all told me that my curly hair is really ‘fitting’ for the surfer look, and I’ve come to like my hair and myself more,” he said. 

The government has rolled out plans – including the building of wave pools – to develop this surfing hot spot, which bustles with surf clubs, restaurants and cafes.

Tourists, some clad in surfing gear, soak up the sun or stroll along the shop-lined street, checking out hair-braiding services and contemplating whether to have their fortunes read at a tarot stand. The rock song Hotel California plays on repeat at the main entrance of the beach where Senlin Inn, Riyuewan’s first hotel, is. 

On the beach, stalls sell food ranging from Xinjiang noodles to qing bu liang, a dessert soup, while groups of visitors snap selfies or walk along the shoreline. Surfers appear like dots on the horizon as they wait on their boards for the next wave.

Mr Zhang recalled how quiet Riyuewan used to be – and how inconvenient it was – when he first visited in 2015 to surf with a friend.

“There was only one provision shop in the entire area, and it sold only cup noodles and toothbrushes. The street lights were also very dim,” said Mr Zhang.

“There was also no such thing as deliveries. When we received parcels, we had to take a trip into town, and it was a one-hour round trip.

“Now there are so many shops, bars and cafes. It is so vibrant.” 

Former sailing athlete Lin Qiao Wen, 38, moved to the bay in 2018 to coach Hainan’s surfing team.

“Growing up in Hainan, I’d never even heard of Riyuewan until 2018, after the team was set up and I moved here. At that time, there were no amenities and it was very basic. Now, there are jams every day,” he said.

But Riyuewan’s future is at a crossroads now that Chinese citizens can travel internationally again, and long-term travellers like Mr Shi and Liu Liu are contemplating their future here.

“It is hard to tell whether the domestic tourists’ interest in surfing at Riyuewan will be sustained, now that there are more options for travel,” Liu Liu said.

He plans to decide whether to stay on in Riyuewan after most of China’s major holidays, including the week-long Labour Day break and the Dragon Boat Festival, end in June.

“The crowds in the first six months of this year will be a good indicator of whether being a surf coach in Riyuewan is a viable career,” he added.

Mr Shi said that he is applying for a working holiday visa in New Zealand, and hopes to save enough money to fund a study programme in Japan. 

“I’ve picked these two countries because they have beaches that are famous for surfing,” he said.

“I love the changes that Riyuewan has brought to my life, and I hope that I can continue to find personal growth in other places as I continue with my passion for surfing.”