BEIJING – China’s recent moves to withhold economic data have raised concerns about the country’s fragile recovery since the easing of anti-Covid-19 measures in late 2022.

But analysts say that holding back such data, while aimed at maintaining social stability, is likely to further dampen growth.

July’s unemployment rate for those aged between 16 and 24 was due to be out on Tuesday but the release was suspended at the last minute.

Unemployment hit a record high of 21.3 per cent in June, up from 20.8 per cent in May.

In May, the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) quietly stopped releasing the monthly index on consumer confidence.

Analysts questioned the NBS’ explanation that it suspended the release of youth unemployment figures because it wants to improve its methods for collecting and analysing data.

“The omission... is clearly out of concern that the rate will continue to break record highs in the coming months as more graduates are preparing to enter the workforce,” UOB Bank economist Ho Woei Chen told The Straits Times.

Hang Seng Bank chief economist Dan Wang said the move “came as a surprise but is consistent with efforts to maintain stability” in the country.

With a record 11.58 million university graduates set to enter the workforce in 2023, Beijing has been under pressure to create jobs for them.

While the young account for only 2 per cent of the urban workforce, the problems they face in landing employment have been “highly visible”, added Ms Wang.

Reports by both local and international media have highlighted China’s difficulties in creating jobs, given how badly battered its economy is after three years of a strict zero-Covid policy and the government’s regulatory crackdown on formerly booming sectors such as tech, education and property.

Graduates have also taken to social media to air their problems about finding jobs, with many posting graduation photos of themselves posing as zombies to represent their disillusionment with their career prospects.

More attention on youth unemployment “will make it even harder (for the government) to keep the market stable”, said Ms Wang of Hang Seng Bank.

She noted that “economic weakness and a lack of short-term policy response have created widespread speculative behaviours in Chinese markets” since the beginning of the year.

Youth unemployment is closely monitored, as it is an indicator of China’s economic performance and job market volatility.

Chinese officials have long defended their data collection methods as robust and scientific, as they already exclude groups such as students who are not looking for jobs.

Yet, the NBS now says that it needs to conduct more research to better define young people in labour statistics, taking into consideration the rising length of education.

It is not known when new data will be released.

It also remains unclear if the NBS will bring back the consumer confidence index. The monthly data was withdrawn in May after it became increasingly clear that retail sentiment in the world’s second-largest economy is waning.

Economists are starting to doubt whether China will hit its growth target of around 5 per cent in 2023 after it missed its 5.5 per cent target in 2022, with the economy expanding by just 3 per cent.

Investment bank JPMorgan has already lowered its growth forecast for China to 4.8 per cent in 2023 – down from 6.4 per cent in May, while Barclays dropped its estimate by 0.4 percentage point to 4.5 per cent.

China’s recovery this year has been lacklustre, with growth in retail sales – which the government vowed to make its top priority in 2023 – registering 2.5 per cent in July.

In June, retail sales grew by 3.1 per cent, falling sharply from the 12.7 per cent expansion in May.

Consumption figures have so far disappointed economists.

Despite a buoyant start to 2023 with the easing of Covid-19 measures, China’s economy has been struggling to recover since a sharp downturn in its property sector amid intense regulatory clampdowns on its tech and education industries during the worst of the pandemic years.

Analysts warned China against withholding more economic data, as it can weaken confidence in the country’s economy. Investors may feel that they do not have enough data to make informed decisions on where to put their money, they added.

Mr Bo Zhengyuan, a partner at Plenum consultancy in Shanghai, said that China will need to do more to assuage investors’ concerns, given the economy’s disappointing performance so far.

Direct investment by foreign companies in China between April and June totalled US$4.9 billion (S$6.7 billion), an 87 per cent decline from a year ago, according to figures released in August by the State Administration of Foreign Exchange of China. It is the largest drop since 1998, when comparable data first became available.

Withholding further data will “undoubtedly leave investors perplexed” about the worrying state of China’s economy, Mr Bo added.

Ms Liu Wei, who is graduating from a university in Zhengzhou, the provincial capital of Henan in central China, said the NBS’ decision to stop publishing the youth jobless rate has made her feel invisible.

Ms Liu, who majored in agricultural technology and is still looking for a job, said: “I feel very hurt because the omission makes me feel like my problems have been swept under the carpet.

“Having more media attention on the problem of jobless youth in China gave me hope that the government will continue to do more to try and fix the situation.”

“Now, I’m worried that it will take even longer to solve job woes that those of my generation are facing.”