KOLKATA - India’s worst train crash in more than two decades ought to intensify the focus on boosting safety in its railways, experts have said, even as the government goes ahead with an ambitious 2.4 trillion rupee (S$39.3 billion) programme to overhaul the vast rail network with semi-high-speed trains and upgraded stations.

“This incident should serve as a reminder to the various levels of railway management that safety has to remain in focus even while implementing modernisation schemes,” said Mr Subodh Jain, a former member of the Railway Board who handled engineering-related projects for Indian Railways.

At least 275 people were killed in a “three-way” accident on June 2 near a small station in the eastern state of Odisha on the busy rail route that connects India’s east to the south.

A passenger train rammed into a stationary freight train, with its derailed coaches spilling over to a nearby track and crashing into another passenger train that was passing on the adjacent line at the same moment.

India’s Railway Minister Ashwini Vaishnaw told reporters on Sunday the cause and people responsible for the crash had been identified, as he suggested a signal fault may have led to the disaster. The Ministry of Railways has recommended that the case be now handed over to the federally-run Central Bureau of Investigation for further inquiry.

Mr Jain told The Straits Times that Indian Railways’ priority should be moving towards greater automation in its signalling system by incorporating the latest signalling technologies to remove chances of human error, thereby boosting safety.

“The point is that the electronic systems we use now should be fail-safe,” he added.

An anti-collision mechanism has been developed by Indian Railways, but its roll-out has been slow and it was not available on the route in Odisha where the crash occurred.

India’s railway network has seen a declining trend of “consequential” accidents, falling from 74 in 2017-18 to 20 in 2020-21.

But such accidents, which involve human casualties and injuries, still remain a concern in a country that runs the world’s fourth-largest train network, transporting around 24 million passengers daily and moving more than 1.5 billion tonnes of freight in 2022-23.

A report from the Comptroller and Auditor-General (CAG) of India, which was tabled in Parliament in December 2022, said nearly three in four of the 217 “consequential” train accidents between 2017-18 and 2020-21 were caused by derailments.

Major factors responsible for derailments were related to inadequate maintenance of tracks, “deviation of track parameters beyond permissible limits”, and “bad driving/overspeeding”.

Mr Jain said Indian Railways’ plans to replace ageing tracks had not kept pace with growth in traffic, as it is often not possible to do so on busy routes, leaving worn-out tracks to handle heavy traffic.

“There is a backlog when it comes to replacing tracks. If a rail is to be replaced after it has carried 800 million tonnes, it is being replaced at 900 or 1,000 million tonnes,” he added.

Staff shortages have also been a problem. A representative of the All India Loco Running Staff Association told ST that more than 300 locomotive driver positions were vacant, forcing existing drivers to be overworked for as long as 12 hours in a day, which could have adverse consequences on safety.

There were over 312,000 vacancies in Indian Railways as at December 2022, including many in safety-related categories such as train examiners.

A lack of funds to boost safety has also been an issue. The CAG report looked into the performance of Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK), a special fund created in 2017-18 with one trillion rupees to augment safety in Indian Railways.

Spending through the fund was spread over a period of five years, with an annual outlay of 200 billion rupees. Of this, 150 billion rupees were to come from government budgetary support and the remaining 50 billion rupees were supposed to be sourced from the railways’ internal resources each year.

But the audit found that generation of internal resources from the railways had fallen short severely, with only 42.25 billion rupees coming in instead of the 200 billion rupees expected over a four-year period.

Utilisation of the funds – which were meant to augment safety – has also raised questions, with the report flagging the “increasing trend” of using RRSK funds for “non-priority works”.

Government think-tank Niti Aayog also noted that expenditures on signalling and telecom-related works under this fund in 2019-20 had been mostly incurred on replacing old signalling equipment, with no money spent on bringing in the “latest globally accepted signalling technologies” that could have helped improve efficiency.

Professor Swapnil Garg, who teaches strategic management at the Indian Institute of Management, Indore, said the government had poured in significant funds to overhaul India’s train network.

He, however, noted Indian Railways’ spending was limited as it lacked “risk-taking ability” when it comes to adopting new technologies, with its funds not being utilised to the fullest to improve safety.

“As a resource-constrained society, we have always talked about saving money rather than spending it. You just cannot turn the key and spend a billion dollars. You need to set up a planned system to start spending funds resourcefully,” he told ST.

A former mechanical engineer with Indian Railways for 23 years, Prof Garg said this latest crash should not derail its growth plans.

“They have to look at balancing across the board. We have this saying, ‘The ship is safest at the harbour’. Is this what we want?”