BEIJING – Postgraduate student Shelly Gu has sent out about 80 job applications since August 2022 but secured only one offer so far.

“I consider myself lucky to get even a single offer,” said Ms Gu, 23, a chemical engineering student from a university in Zhejiang province. “I have friends who are still looking for jobs, and they have not secured anything.”

“I’m not entirely satisfied with my offer, to be honest,” she said of the position of office manager with a private company. “But I’m relieved and grateful that I have something in the bag.”

Such is the harsh reality for fresh graduates in China. Economic recovery has been patchy since the lifting of Covid-19 restrictions in 2022. Employment statistics released on June 15 showed that one in five young Chinese aged between 16 and 24 is jobless.

The youth unemployment rate for May hit 20.8 per cent. This figure represents six million jobless young people out of 33 million who want to work, according to the National Bureau of Statistics. There are 96 million Chinese aged 16 to 24, many of whom are in school.

The jobless youth problem is even more dire when set against overall unemployment, which edged down to 5.2 per cent in May from the 5.5 per cent in December 2022 when Covid-19 restrictions were first lifted.

What is more, youth joblessness is expected to worsen in the months to come as a record 11.58 million university students will be graduating and entering the workforce. The number of graduates is swelled by postgraduate students such as Ms Gu.

In 2020, at the height of the pandemic when the economy was badly hit, Chinese universities expanded their master’s programmes by 25 per cent or 189,000 places to help ease unemployment among fresh graduates.

“With graduate coursework typically encompassing two or three years of study, most of the graduates benefiting from the enrolment drive should logically be seeking employment this year,” said lead economist Louise Loo at Oxford Economics, an advisory firm.

Their job hunt will not be an easy one, given China’s slow economic recovery and stiff competition for high-paying jobs. To make matters worse, the effects of prolonged unemployment are likely to stretch decades into the future.

How did it come to this?

Covid-19 and crackdowns

The reasons are varied, but notable ones include the country’s tough measures during the first three years of the Covid-19 pandemic and a series of regulatory clampdowns on key sectors such as education, tech and property.

Although the pandemic measures are gone, the battered private sector still “lacks the confidence to expand”, said Dr Larry Hu, chief China economist and a managing director at financial services firm Macquarie Group. This is particularly true for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which provide more than 80 per cent of urban employment.

The crackdown on the education, tech and property sectors took place as the pandemic hit. The double whammy meant the death of many companies in these sectors and beyond. Those that survived are in an anaemic state and have cut back on the hiring of youth with no work experience. The faltering recovery has reinforced the hiring freeze.

But rising youth unemployment has other drivers as well.

One of these is the large gap between the wage that young graduates are willing to accept and the rate that firms are willing to pay, said economics professor Nancy Qian.

This mismatch reflected the extent to which the cost of living has outpaced the growth in salaries, said the Northwestern University don in a recent Project Syndicate article. She cited a 2021 survey that found that new graduates in big cities like Shanghai and Beijing were paid an average of only 5,290 yuan (S$992) per month, which “is just enough to rent a 25 sq m apartment”.

But instead of moving to smaller cities with poorer amenities, many graduates chose to stay put and remain jobless because of parental support. “If you are in this situation and your parents can cover your living expenses, why bother to work for a pittance?” she said.

“China, thus, needs not only more jobs, but more high-paying jobs,” Prof Qian concluded.

Professor Zhao Hao of the China Europe International Business School in Shanghai said that parents and grandparents are pitching in to save the young from having to relive the hard times they went through.

“With family support, young people are not under pressure to survive and can keep looking until they find better jobs,” he told The Straits Times.

Knock-on effects

High unemployment among the Chinese youth will have knock-on effects on overall economic growth and may even lead to social and political instability if left unchecked, analysts said. 

“The weak labour market makes consumers reluctant to spend, (and) with sluggish demand, companies are reluctant to hire,” said Dr Hu.

As those aged between 16 and 24 are among the bigger spenders on items such as rent, clothing, transport and entertainment, “if this cohort’s income growth is curtailed, the longevity of China’s service-led consumption recovery may also run into substantial headwinds”, said Oxford Economics’ Ms Loo.

As for the jobless youth themselves, the longer they are unemployed, the worse their future earnings will be. In Britain, for example, when a 22-year-old is unemployed for a year, his or her wages are depressed by between 13 per cent and 21 per cent 20 years later. 

Youth unemployment depresses lifetime earnings, because “young people are missing important opportunities to develop skills”, Prof Qian said.

Chinese graduates who join the workforce later in their lives face a related problem: age discrimination.

The “35-year-old threshold”, as the problem is known in China, refers to the reluctance of employers to hire people who hit their mid-thirties; in some sectors such as IT, those in that age group are considered “senior citizens”, more likely to be dismissed than recruited.

What this means is that for these graduates, “the golden period for employment is getting shorter, and the return from educational investment reduces”, said Prof Zhao.

“Chinese people historically value education and believe education can change one’s fate. If that belief is compromised, it causes anxiety and social discontent,” he added.

Social discontent, higher crime and disaffection towards the government are the sort of spillover effects that policymakers in Beijing are trying to avoid.

From scholar to hawker?

The government has been rolling out a wide range of measures to boost youth employment, including subsidising companies that hire unemployed youth, accelerating civil service recruitment, a one-time expansion of hiring at state-owned enterprises, support for skills training and traineeships and support for the entrepreneurial ambitions of university graduates and migrant workers.

But these worthy efforts run into a separate set of challenges: High youth unemployment is co-existing with a huge shortfall of workers in the manufacturing sector. It is estimated that the shortage could hit 30 million by 2025 as young educated Chinese increasingly shun blue-collar jobs.

This mismatch between aspiration and reality has led young Chinese to popularise a fictional character, Kong Yiji, as a meme and metaphor for their predicament.

A Qing dynasty character in one of Chinese satirist Lu Xun’s short stories, Kong fails to pass the imperial exams. Unable to pursue a career in the government, he continues to wear a scholar’s gown, refuses to take on other work and is eventually driven into extreme poverty and theft.

One netizen commented on microblogging platform Weibo: “Everyone says that a good education is a stepping stone for my career, but I’ve realised it is a pedestal I cannot get off from.”

State media have urged fresh graduates not to be shackled by Kong’s gown, and promoted stories of how university graduates have taken on work such as selling street food and scrap recycling.

In a move reminiscent of the Mao-era “down to the countryside” movement, the government is also encouraging young people to take part in its rural revitalisation efforts. For instance, Guangdong province plans to send 300,000 university graduates to rural areas by the end of 2025 to work as grassroots cadres, entrepreneurs or volunteers.

But for many young people like Mr Bob Feng, 22, going back to their villages is not an option.

“The work culture in my village is really bad. It’s really just older people planting crops. Most of their time is spent idling. There’s no vibrancy. I am not very keen to spend my best years doing that,” said the business major who came from a village in Zhejiang and will soon graduate from a university in Shanghai.

Instead, he has interviewed for a job as a medical equipment salesman.

Economists expect the government to roll out more policy support, particularly in the key property and service sectors.

Ms Loo said the government will need to act fast to prop up growth because “the slower or less decisive the response, the higher the risk that they have to apply the targeted measures for longer”.

The stakes are high also because of China’s rapidly ageing population, with its implications for growth and social welfare funding. Prolonged and widespread youth unemployment can have profoundly negative long-run macroeconomic consequences.

To fix the hydra-headed problem of youth unemployment, the government needs to focus on not just growing the economy, but also moving it up the value chain to provide more and better jobs for its young people.

It needs also to somehow get its youth to set aside Kong Yiji’s metaphorical scholar’s gown.