Surging energy prices are wreaking havoc on the budgets of countries that make up the European Union (EU), with the impact of subsidy programmes intended to keep fossil fuels affordable blunted by skyrocketing international market rates.

Europe united to impose punishing sanctions on much of Russia's economy in the wake of the Feb 24 invasion of Ukraine, but with the conspicuous omission of the energy sector.

The decision to leave out energy stemmed from the fact that many European economies are dependent on Russia for gas. In 2021, Russia met 40 per cent of Europe's total gas needs by pipeline, as well as an additional 5 per cent as liquefied natural gas (LNG).

Despite the European efforts to adopt a business-as-usual approach to oil and gas trade with Russia, President Vladimir Putin has resorted to restricting gas flows through pipelines such as Nord Stream 1, seeking to arm twist the EU into engaging in diplomacy and lifting sanctions over the war in Ukraine.

Faced with the prospect of a difficult winter without assured gas supplies from Russia, European countries have sought to secure supplies in international markets. This has put the mostly cash-rich EU countries into direct competition with buyers in Asia and elsewhere, with the surge in demand for LNG cargoes causing prices to shoot up.

Sky-high prices are unlikely to come down without diplomacy taking over in the Ukraine war and a rollback of sanctions on Russia, said Mr Ajay Shankar, a distinguished fellow at The Energy and Resources Institute (Teri).

"If that doesn't happen, then I don't see the prices coming down in the near future because Europe needs LNG terminals to make up for the shortfall from Russia, and the rest of the world needs to step up production to make up for the shortfall from Russia," said Mr Shankar.

"Neither of these are feasible in months. The earliest date for new energy terminal capacity kicking off in Europe is end-2023 or early 2024. And again, when will other sources of gas be able to step up production and how long that takes is also a question," he added.

The jump in prices of gas that is used in many of the power plants and homes across the EU has had a cascading impact on electricity prices, with the price of power in Germany hitting €700 (S$978.70) per megawatt-hour for the first time ever late last month.

The sharp rise in prices has already fuelled protests in the United Kingdom and in Czechoslovakia, sparking concerns among policymakers about the potential for wider social discontent as inflation hits standards of living. That has prompted the promise of measures to cushion households from the impact.

In Britain, newly sworn-in Prime Minister Liz Truss has thwarted a proposal by state energy regulator Ofgem to raise the cap on energy prices in October, which would have seen the average household bill rise from £1,104 (S$1,790) to £3,549 a year.

She has instead unveiled a plan to freeze consumer energy bills at £2,500 for two years from Oct 1 and provide support to businesses in a package that could cost £150 billion. But questions have been raised about the financial viability of the strategy.

In a similar vein, France has committed to capping the increase in electricity costs at 4 per cent. The country, which has an abundance of nuclear power, has also ordered utility EDF to sell more cheap nuclear power to rivals to limit the rise in electricity prices.

Other measures include the allocation of around €25 to 26 billion to help companies with the cost of higher gas and power bills.

In Germany, budget provisions have been made to mitigate the soaring costs through the grant of special allowances to workers and socially disadvantaged families.

Across the EU, the supply crunch has already forced factory closures and led utilities to seek government aid, with energy rationing a distinct possibility.

However, member states have been divided on a proposal to cap prices of gas from Russia, with Moscow warning that it could cease supplies completely in such an event. Some EU states fear losing their gas supplies but others say a price cap would deprive Moscow of cash to fund the war.

Talks between EU energy ministers on Friday raised the prospect of joint purchases of gas, as well as a windfall tax on energy companies making huge profits.

In sharp contrast, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has recommended that European governments pass on the cost to consumers, given that fossil fuels are likely to remain expensive for some time.

In an August blog post, IMF assistant director in the European department Oya Celasun, assistant director Dora Iakova and principal environmental fiscal policy expert Ian Perry said that this would encourage energy saving and a transition away from fossil fuels.

They also noted that the spike in the cost of living could get worse in the event of a cutoff in gas supplies from Russia.

However, Mr Shankar pointed out that decision-makers feel that this is an area where they need to intervene because of the costs to households and people being pushed into poverty or energy poverty especially.

"Politicians and governments are being forced to act and act against orthodox economic positions and their intervening is obviously very costly. But the reality is that they have no option but to try."