SEREMBAN - On paper, Negeri Sembilan should prove to be an easy state electoral win for the unity government alliance of Pakatan Harapan (PH) and Barisan Nasional (BN). The parties currently hold all 36 state assembly seats between them.

But much depends on how well the partnership holds up as the former rivals negotiate which seats to contest in the Aug 12 polls, and who gets to become chief minister when the dust settles.

Negeri Sembilan is the only state in Malaysia where the opposition alliance Perikatan Nasional (PN) does not hold any federal or state seats. Of the 36 seats in the state assembly, PH has 20 and BN holds 16.

In last November’s general election, BN clinched five seats and PH won the remaining three of the state’s eight parliamentary wards.

This makes the state a good benchmark to gauge Malay and semi-urban support for the unity government, said Mr Halmie Azrie Abdul Halim, a senior analyst at government regulatory affairs and political risk consultancy Vriens and Partners. “If the PH-BN partnership is successful in Negeri Sembilan, it would set a good template for the partnership to be replicated in other states.”

A big win in Negeri Sembilan would show that the Malay vote is behind Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, Mr Halmie added. The central Malaysian state has a high number of Malay-majority seats, unlike Penang and Selangor, the other two states controlled by Datuk Seri Anwar’s PH coalition, which have a high number of racially mixed seats.

Of the 36 state seats in Negeri Sembilan, 21 have more than 60 per cent Malay voters, estimated Mr Halmie.

In the November national election, PH received around 31 per cent of Malay votes. Over half of PH’s seats in the Negeri Sembilan state assembly are controlled by Chinese-dominated coalition member, the Democratic Action Party.

Having the Malay-centric Umno, which leads BN, in its ranks should help bolster the unity government’s appeal to the majority community, although voters will have to cross the historical PH-BN divide.

Constituents whom The Straits Times spoke to in the state capital Seremban said they are willing to vote for unity government candidates from either BN or PH, just to ensure that the opposition alliance does not clinch a seat.

Ms Nisa Ali, a 23-year-old launderette worker, said she will vote for parties within the unity government as they unite all the races in Malaysia, compared with the PN alliance which has touched on racial and religious issues in its campaign rhetoric.

A PH supporter who gave her name as Ms Lai said she is willing to cast her vote for a BN candidate as the government agencies are now more efficient, making it easier for residents like her to, for example, settle property taxes and apply for business licences.

“BN is not a bad party, they developed Negeri Sembilan for a very long time under former menteri besar Mohamad Hasan. So I will vote for BN if PH is not contesting in my area. For me, it does not matter which party the chief minister comes from, as long as it is not from PN,” said the 50-year-old tailor.

While PN faces an uphill task in Negeri Sembilan, it could still hold several cards up its sleeve. PN’s Negeri Sembilan chairman Ahmad Faizal Azumu told ST that a “good percentage” of Umno’s voters who are unhappy with the party’s leadership and its partnership with PH will vote for PN.

“We will definitely give BN and PH a challenge,” he said.

There is speculation that Mr Khairy Jamaluddin, the popular former health minister and three-term MP for Rembau ward in the state, could campaign for PN, after being expelled from Umno in January. He remains tight-lipped on his plans but said last Monday that he will support his friends at election rallies.

“It just so happens that most of them now happen to be in Perikatan Nasional,” he said, according to The Star.

Mr Halmie said Mr Khairy may increase PN’s chances in urban areas in Negeri Sembilan, but it will be tough for him to help PN win the state on his own.

Datuk Seri Ahmad Faizal said: “Mr Khairy could be a spark for PN in Negeri Sembilan to start the fire if he decides to join us... I believe he will campaign for us in his own way.”

Unity government partners PH and BN have generally agreed to contest only in the seats they respectively won at the last state election. In addition, PH has offered BN the Lenggeng seat, which means PH will contest in 19 seats and BN in 17 seats.

Assuming the unity government wins on Aug 12, cracks could still appear over which party gets to pick the powerful post of chief minister, who controls the state coffers and tender processes, and forms the exco line-up, said Mr Halmie.

PH chairman Anwar said last Friday that current Negeri Sembilan Menteri Besar Aminuddin Harun, who is from his Parti Keadilan Rakyat, would likely be the next chief minister as he has proven his credibility through investment achievements in the past five years.

Although Mr Aminuddin is keen to renew his term as menteri besar, he said the current focus should be on working together to win the state elections. “If we start to discuss who will grab the post now, it shows that parties are not focused on winning the state elections.”

Negeri Sembilan Umno chief Jalaluddin Alias also stressed that there has been no discussion on the menteri besar post and that he is leaving it to the top leaders to decide.

“We are not underestimating PN, and we are working 24 hours to explain to voters that this is a new political landscape for us to work with PH, and we believe many will accept it. Our aim is to develop Negeri Sembilan as a second Klang Valley,” said Mr Jalaluddin.