BEIJING/WASHINGTON - At a quiet tea shop located on the edges of Beijing’s Tsinghua University, Mr Jasper Boers stands out amid the traditional Chinese wares and the few customers who are there on a Sunday afternoon, all of whom are Chinese.

He draws some glances. After all, American students like him are an increasingly rare presence on Chinese university campuses nowadays.

There are just 350 students from the United States now in China – 2.5 per cent of the 14,000 to 15,000 that were in China a decade ago.

US ambassador to China Nicholas Burns, speaking to US news outlet Politico in April, said it was evidence of how people-to-people exchanges between the US and China have suffered amid the worsening tensions between the world’s top two economies.

Returning to the subject on another occasion, he said: “It’s not healthy. It’s not smart.

“We do want to see students travel back and forth. We ought to want to see young Americans learning Mandarin... so that if they go into business or government, they can understand in a sophisticated way the other power in the world in the 2030s, the 2040s.”

Fewer Chinese students are going to the US as well. The country issued 61,894 student visas to mainland Chinese nationals in 2022, down from the 105,775 in 2019.

That’s a 41.5 per cent drop. Covid-19 lockdowns also had a part to play in the smaller numbers on both sides.

The loss in human connections from such a decoupled relationship is clear.

Mr Boers, a 23-year-old postgraduate student from Maryland who arrived in Beijing in August 2022, recounts some of the conversations he’s had with his Chinese classmates: “Do I work in public service for very little money? Do I go to the private sector to take care of my parents, to make a good living for myself?

“These are exactly the conversations that I would have with my friends in college.”

He and other American students told The Straits Times that keeping an open mind to different world views had been key to their time in China, where they had come in an attempt to understand the country better.

Mr Boers, who graduated from Yale University in 2022, said he found the similarities between the US and China to run the gamut, from geography to bread-and-butter concerns.

“You have very rich coastal regions, quite poor inland regions. You have various places with very high concentration of people, places that attract a lot of migrants. And you have places with very low concentration of people that are forgotten (which all shape) the way people feel,” he said.

“These are all ways in which our countries are far more similar than our leaders would like to admit.”

Still, he recognises that there is an “innate barrier” between him and his Chinese classmates, but that has not stopped him from “being able to develop some relationship with them”.

Another American student, Mr Turan Vural, said he would start conversations with his classmates, no matter where they are from, by listening first and trying to understand their perspectives whenever there are differences.

“It’s just like any kind of social situation. It depends on your aptitude to navigate through, and make people feel comfortable sharing,” said Mr Vural.

“Are sensitive conversations going to stop two beers from appearing on the table and for us to sit at the same table? No.”

“But again, if you’re going to use differences as an opportunity to start throwing the drinks at each other... that’s up to you,” added Mr Vural, 27, who is currently a doctoral student in computer science at the University of California, Los Angeles, after finishing his year at Tsinghua University in mid-2022.

The US and China have differences over a number of issues, including on Taiwan and Xinjiang. Beijing claims sovereignty over Taiwan, and accuses the US of testing that line. The US has also accused China of human rights abuses in Xinjiang, which Beijing has strongly refuted.

One difference Mr Boers said he noticed, is that opinion in China on sensitive issues tends to be more solidified and held by the majority, whereas the US is more divided on issues that are just as important, such as race relations.

Both Mr Boers and Mr Vural’s time in China was arranged under the Schwarzman scheme, started in 2016 by US billionaire and investment firm Blackstone founder Stephen Schwarzman, with a US$300 million donation to Tsinghua University to help ease tensions caused by China’s meteoric rise.

The year-long programme at Tsinghua, one of the country’s top schools, supports up to 200 scholarship holders, 40 per cent of whom are from the US, 20 per cent from China, and the remainder from the rest of the world. Schwarzman scholarship holders graduate with a Master of Global Affairs from Tsinghua University.

It is one of the rare US-China exchanges still in place after the US State Department cancelled five cultural exchange programmes with China, calling them “soft power propaganda tools”.

The five programmes – the Policymakers Educational China Trip Program, the US-China Friendship Program, the US-China Leadership Exchange Program, the US-China Transpacific Exchange Program and the Hong Kong Educational and Cultural Program – have shown no signs of resuming.

The Fulbright China programme, which for more than four decades brought US and China graduate students and scholars to each other’s country, was cancelled in 2020 by an executive order from former president Donald Trump over Beijing’s imposition of the national security law in Hong Kong.

President Joe Biden has extended the order twice.

Ms August Caldwell, 24, programme coordinator for the China Folk House project in West Virginia, is among those who found it difficult to get back to China post-pandemic after having lived there for 1½ years.

“I couldn’t really find a way to do it,” she said. “I want to do something structured, and there are fewer programmes like that. Fulbright doesn’t have a programme in China any more, and other similar programmes also stopped, around 2020.”

She added: “There have been less immersive opportunities for American students and American people in general, and there’s such a large trend in US media and also in coverage of politics, in which it seems such an objective truth that China is terrible and evil and nefarious. But when people have more personal experiences and they actually talk to people and have opportunities to accept different frameworks, they can become more empathetic and understanding.”

Mr Boers said that, after his year in China, he is now better prepared to answer questions back home about China, and understands how some things are “uniquely China”.

For example, he has tried to explain China’s household registration, or hukou, system to people back home. The Chinese are assigned a hukou at birth, which limits their benefits to the province or even the city or village they are born in.

In the US, people would be out in the streets if the government tries to restrict their movement from one state to another, Mr Boers said. “There’s no conceptualisation or parallel in the US of what the hukou system is like,” he added.

It is an example of why people-to-people exchanges should continue, so that they can understand each other better.

“I’m no expert, of course, but you begin to have a bit more of an answer to the sort of hard questions that you get asked about the country after having been here for a year,” said Mr Boers, who travelled to more than 10 cities in China, including Qingdao and Dandong.

Such questions include why China is heavily surveilled or why it has an aversion to political turbulence, he said.

At the same time, prospective Chinese students are also increasingly reluctant to go to the US.

Mr Danny Yu, a counsellor in Beijing, no longer plans to apply to Northwestern University in Chicago for postgraduate studies in psychology, something he had always wanted to do, because of perceptions that the US, with its gun violence, is no longer safe.

“And adding to that, how US and China ties are worsening, I don’t want to go to the US any more,” he added. He plans to look at countries in Europe as well as programmes in China.

For his part, despite surveys showing that the Chinese are also holding more negative views of Americans, Mr Boers said he never felt any hostility: “They’re usually very curious about my country, curious to hear why I am here.”

Estranged relationship: When it is not just the political leaders who are not talking

Deep in the woods of West Virginia, up a short dirt track just 60 minutes’ drive from Washington, stands a farmhouse transplanted from a village in Yunnan province in south-western China.

On a recent Sunday, a group of mostly student and academic volunteers were busy firing up barbecues and putting up display boards. They were celebrating the arrival of roof tiles from Yunnan, to be fixed on the farmhouse.

Amid the often outright hostile relationship today between China and the United States, the China Folk House is an exceptionally rare bright spot. The farmhouse arrived in 2019, having been dismantled and transported from its original location in Yunnan’s Cizhong Valley, where it was under threat from dam construction.

The idea came from an American high school teacher of Chinese history, Dr John Flower, who thought it could be restored as a living museum and venue for cultural exchange between the US and China.

More than 150 American students helped to reconstruct it.

One of them, Ms Caldwell, told The Straits Times: “It was just crazy to me that whole towns and cities could just be underwater, including a house this beautiful which is so connected to one family’s identity, to their cultural traditions.”

Among the project’s supporters were China’s foreign affairs minister, Mr Qin Gang, formerly an ambassador to the US, and Mr Kurt Campbell, currently the Biden administration’s Indo-Pacific czar, who was also an early donor.

In the time since, though, the US-China relationship has plummeted, as both sides double down on their antagonism over issues ranging from Taiwan to trade.

This has not just affected government-to-government or business relationships. It has also frayed links between students, academics, researchers and non-governmental organisations on both sides, with effects that observers worry could last generations.

Even with Covid-19 lockdowns in the rearview mirror, and both countries having dismantled travel curbs, geopolitical competition continues to cloud the relationship with fear and prejudice.  

Experts do not see the exchanges recovering to the levels they were before.

Mr Bill Bishop, a China analyst who runs the newsletter Sinocism popular among China watchers, said for US students, China is no longer seen as “a great place to go, or great for your career opportunities”.

But China has also changed, he said, with its previous openness now seeming like a “distant dream”.

Higher-level academic exchanges and collaborations have suffered as a result, with researchers and scientists rigorously screened in both countries for reasons of national security.

Noting it was “terrible on the human level, on a state to state level, on a political level”, Mr Bishop said: “It is a very worrisome trend. I think Chinese student numbers in the US will recover much faster, but I’d be shocked if we get anywhere near pre-pandemic levels for Americans in China.”

And while Chinese students still make up the largest foreign student cohort in the US, their numbers are down.

This could be due not just to the soured US-China relationship, said the director of the Lieberthal-Rogel Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan, Associate Professor Ann Chih Lin.

“There are also factors other than that; one is gun violence,” she said.

“The vast majority of international students will never be touched by American gun violence, but the unpredictability and America’s unwillingness to do anything that might reduce it is, I think, a real fear factor for parents in China and international families more generally, who would never have to worry about this in the countries that they come from.”

Overall, the negative perceptions held by both sides of each other are only becoming worse.

A Pew Research Center survey in March found that 83 per cent of American adults have negative views of China. Almost half – 44 per cent – have “very unfavourable views”.

About 40 per cent of respondents also believe it is “impossible” for the US to mend ties with China.

In China, an annual survey by state newspaper Global Times in December 2022 found that 59 per cent of 2,282 respondents believe the current Biden administration is “unable to govern America”, while 53.5 per cent said the US is “unable to behave as a responsible major power”.

The importance of China-US relations also fell to fourth place from third in 2021, with Russia, the European Union and South-east Asia now seen as the country’s top three most important foreign relationships.

Professor Shi Yinhong, director of the Centre on American Studies at the Renmin University of China in Beijing, noted: “It is now observable that the people from both countries see the other’s government and the rest of ruling elites as evil.”

Mr Jacob Gunter, senior analyst for the Mercator Institute for China Studies in Berlin who himself went to Shanghai for a semester in language immersion in 2010, said that the growing estrangement between ordinary American and Chinese people was “one of the biggest medium- to long-term risks in the US-China relationship”.

“There will be certain things that we have irreconcilable differences over, and we’re going to have friction, but we’re going to have to find a way to deal with it, or we’re going to have some degree of conflict,” he said.

Right now, there is a tendency for Americans to say, “we don’t like what’s going on in China”, said Dr John Israel, professor emeritus of China Studies at the University of Virginia.

Sporting a blue baseball cap with the words “Make China Great Again” – a humorous reference to the red Maga (Make America Great Again) caps worn by Donald Trump and his supporters – he told The Straits Times at the China Folk House: “We don’t like their values, we don’t like their political system – and therefore we’re going to be their enemies. And that’s a stupid, stupid way to look at it.”

During the Cold War, he said, it was vital to nurture personal relationships between the warring Western and Soviet blocs.

There is a similar need today for such connections to prevent an irrevocable and total break.

“I see this as very important for this generation,” he said. “We have to see how to keep relations alive.”

There are one or two glimmers of hope.

Dr Flower hopes to restart in 2024 a programme he oversees at the elite Sidwell Friends School in Washington to bring American students to China. Since 1991, roughly 200 have gone on it. 

“Our purpose is to make sure that these people-to-people exchanges are revived,” he told ST. “In fact, we want to double down on it because we think it’s more important than ever for that mutual understanding to be fostered.”

This is where something like the China Folk House, limited as it is, holds out the hope of cultural bridges, said Dr Flower.

“China is not an abstraction when you go to the house. It’s almost a living thing, and it’s a human thing,” he said. “People relate to it on that level.”