Wars can create and define the character of nations.

This much is evident by looking at Ukraine. Until recently, some – not only in Russia – questioned the very existence of Ukrainian national identity. But Ukraine’s determination in fighting for its survival has forged the nation and probably also determined its economic and political course for many decades.

However, could the same be said for Russia, a country with a far longer history as an independent state and one that has played such a pivotal role in European and global affairs for many centuries? Could it also be altered by the current fighting?

Of course, much will ultimately depend on how the war ends: A victory for Russia or even a military draw allowing Russian President Vladimir Putin to claim some success will have a different impact from a war that ends with a humiliating Russian defeat.

But even at this early stage, it is already evident that the worst conflict experienced in Europe since World War II has altered Russia’s political and military outlook in profoundly negative terms. The future Russia will be heavily armed, deeply resentful, and more ready to use its nuclear weapons in what it sees as its fight for survival against the West.

The most obvious change – for the worse – has already occurred in the country’s economic outlook. The government has survived the Western-imposed sanctions. But nothing should deflect attention from the fact that the departure of Western investors has effectively wiped out three decades of Russian economic reform designed to connect the country to the global economy after the fall of communism.

In his speech to the St Petersburg International Economic Forum – his country’s flagship yearly economic gathering, which concluded over the weekend in Russia’s second-biggest city – Mr Putin glossed over this loss of foreign investors: “If foreign manufacturers want to return, come to our market – and we hear such conversations more and more often – we are not closing the doors to anyone.”

But with global investors losing their appetite for political risk-taking and with plenty of other venues for capital, why should anyone rush back into Russia when the Ukraine war ends? For years to come, the country will struggle to restart its manufacturing sector. It will remain confined to the role of a Third World economy, exporting raw materials and using the receipts to buy goods manufactured by others.

It is also evident that the Ukraine war has decisively altered Russia’s foreign policy orientation. Since he came to power in 2000, Mr Putin has built a reputation for caustic comments about Western hypocrisy and duplicity. But until recently, he was also careful to leave diplomatic options open, including Russia’s integration into European or global cooperation structures. Indeed, Mr Putin often accused the West of not following its words with deeds by failing to offer Russia good integration opportunities.

Existential war with the West

All this language is now gone. Every single significant arms control agreement concluded between Russia and the West over the past half-century has either expired or was torn up. Every speech that Mr Putin now makes echoes the theme of a Russia at war with the West, one in which the choice is between remaining independent or “becoming a slave, a Western colony”, as he recently put it.

There is a return to the old Soviet rhetoric of creating an anti-Western alliance comprising the developing nations of the so-called Global South plus the Brics, namely Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.

In theory, that makes perfect sense. As Mr Putin never tires of reminding audiences, the Brics alone account for about a third of the world’s wealth, and their economic clout is growing. And, as became clear over the past year, the nations of the Global South have no interest in isolating Russia.

The Russian President was delighted to welcome in Moscow recently a delegation of African leaders who attempted to broker a ceasefire in Ukraine; Mr Putin knew that this would amount to nothing, but the presence in Moscow of regional heavyweights like the President of South Africa was a clear and welcome indication that, contrary to Western allegations, Russia was not isolated on the global stage.

Yet what does this mean in practice? Unlike China, Russia cannot offer credits or preferential trade terms to developing nations. Nor is the Russian economy a good fit for most developing economies, apart from one sector: weapon sales.

For these reasons, Russia’s reorientation towards the developing world is a rerun of the old Soviet Union’s engagement in Africa and parts of Asia and Latin America: adventures designed to oppose the West without promoting anything productive.

The recent involvement of the Wagner Group, Russia’s private army, in African countries such as Mali, Chad and Burkina Faso, was prompted almost entirely by a desire to humiliate the French, who had troops there. But beyond that, the presence of the Wagner mercenaries achieves nothing apart from fanning the flames of other African wars.

Nuclear weapons and religion

But probably the most significant development arising from the Ukraine war is in how Russia looks upon its nuclear arsenals and how it may consider using them in the future.

Nuclear weapons have always served as Russia’s passport to great power status, as the ultimate guarantee that, regardless of how technologically sophisticated or numerous the country’s enemies may be, they cannot defeat Russia without blowing up the entire planet. Russia’s arsenal is the world’s biggest, with thousands of powerful nuclear weapons designed to level cities and thousands of smaller ones built to be used on the battlefield. Russia’s nuclear arsenal has long been the best-maintained part of its armed forces.

What is less appreciated is that, especially under Mr Putin, the country’s nuclear warheads are no longer seen as simply weapons but have come to assume a sort of religious status fused with Russia’s national identity.

The Soviet Union’s first nuclear weapons were designed in the 1940s in a vacated monastery in Sarov; the monks who used to occupy the place for hundreds of years were taken out and shot. To this day, Sarov, a town approximately 400km south-east of Moscow, remains closed to visitors as it continues to be a critical nuclear research centre.

But over the past two decades and with the active encouragement of the government, an old Russian religious cult was revived around St Seraphim of Sarov, a monk and holy man who died back in the early 19th century and who, not coincidentally, came from the monastery where Russia’s first nuclear bomb was invented. Seraphim is now the patron saint of Russia’s nuclear weapons. And in October 2016, some of St Seraphim’s holy relics were carried ceremoniously into space by a Soyuz Russian rocket.

Mr Putin has often used religion to provide post-communist Russia with an identity; the fact that Russian Orthodox Christianity harbours both a sense of superiority as one of the first – if not the original – strands in the global Christian faith and a sense of inferiority and resentment against the much more numerous Roman Catholics who marginalised the Orthodox believers only helps Mr Putin’s anti-Western narrative.

As pointed out by Professor Dmitry Adamsky from Israel, who has written a book about Russia’s nuclear weapons and religion, the association between the bomb and the church carries a more practical Russian political message: “In order to preserve its Orthodox character, Russia needs to ensure it is... a strong nuclear power, and in order to guarantee its nuclear status, Russia has to be genuinely Orthodox.”

Unlike most religions with grave misgivings about or outright opposition to nuclear weapons, Russian Orthodox priests bless nuclear submarines and sprinkle holy water over intercontinental ballistic missiles. And top Russian church officials regularly speak about the potential need to use these weapons.

It’s easy but wrong to dismiss these things as just irrelevant propaganda. As is becoming clear in the Ukraine war, the religious-patriotic framing of Russia’s nuclear status has some direct consequences.

In a seminal article published just a week ago in Moscow, Professor Sergei Karaganov, one of the country’s leading security analysts, declared that, for Russia, “the creation of nuclear weapons was the result of divine intervention”.

“What is being decided on the battlefields in Ukraine,” he continued, “is not only, and not so much, what Russia and the future world order will look like, but mainly whether there will be any world at all... (whether) the planet will turn into radioactive ruins.”

Mere rants of an academic? Perhaps, but it is noticeable that threats to use nuclear weapons are now commonplace in Russia and are being made by almost everyone. Mr Putin even managed to include a nuclear threat in his speech to the St Petersburg International Economic Forum.

The frequent nuclear threats are designed to frighten the West away from providing further military assistance to Ukraine. But they are also part of a more serious debate among Russia’s leaders on how they can restore the tattered reputation of their military; whatever happens, Russia cannot be defeated is a crucial objective.

There are also indications that the Russian armed forces are considering the production of smaller and lower-yield nuclear charges that can be used on the battlefield, if only to compensate for heavy losses in conventional forces.

This is not to say the Russians are about to use nuclear weapons in Ukraine; that option would probably be considered by Mr Putin only if he faces a humiliating defeat in Ukraine, including the loss of the Crimea peninsula he occupied back in 2014.

Still, the rumblings in Moscow indicate that the use of nuclear weapons – until recently a taboo topic – is now becoming a standard subject of discussion.

And it all points to a future Russia decoupled from the global economy, backward in developmental terms, resentful of its fate and persuaded that it faces an existential crisis which it is determined to win, even if it may require resorting to nuclear weapons.

Altogether, a grim prospect.