DOHA, Qatar - Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida on Tuesday wrapped up his tour of the Middle East in gas-rich Qatar, where he discussed “developments related to energy security and supplies”, as the official communique issued at the end of his visit put it.

But although Mr Kishida concentrated on securing immediate oil and gas contracts, there is no doubt that his visit was designed to ensure Japan’s energy supplies over a much extended period when China’s political involvement in the Middle East is on the rise.

Over the past decade, all Middle Eastern oil and gas exporters have concentrated on the Asian markets, partly because Asian economies were growing fast and partly because Russia dominated Europe’s energy markets, which, in any case, were predicted to shrink in value due to European efforts in limiting carbon emissions.

This changed 18 months ago as a result of the war in Ukraine.

Eager to cut off their energy dependency on Russia, European governments turned to Middle Eastern suppliers, and particularly to Qatar, which exports most of its natural gas in liquefied form (LNG) through tanker ships.

This ensures it can offer quick deliveries without the need for a gas pipeline infrastructure of the kind Russia operated in Europe.

But major Gulf gas producers are not enthusiastic about diverting their exports to Europe, only to see the Russians – now desperately looking for outlets for their own oil and gas – poach the Gulf states’ energy markets in Asia.

Thus, although Qatar has responded positively to the Europeans’ demand for some LNG supplies, it has remained focused on Asian markets.

In June, Qatar announced a 27-year deal to supply four million tonnes annually to the China National Petroleum Corporation.

The contract matches the one Qatar signed in November 2022 with China’s Sinopec, the longest concluded by any gas exporter.

Meanwhile, and measured by any yardstick, Japan has fallen behind China in terms of both business and political influence in the Gulf region.

Japan’s LNG importers have not signed a contract with Qatar since 2014 and Qatari LNG deliveries to Tokyo plunged by more than 60 per cent in 2022.

Furthermore, while Chinese President Xi Jinping visited the Gulf region in December – very soon after Covid-19 travel restrictions were lifted in his country – Mr Kishida’s Gulf tour this week is the first by the head of the Japanese government since Mr Shinzo Abe’s visit in 2020.

Mr Kishida did well in his tour of Saudi Arabia.

The Saudis supply 40 per cent of Japan’s oil needs and Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman, the country’s Energy Minister, vowed to remain Japan’s top supplier.

“We continue to guarantee oil supply to Japan and maintain our position as the most reliable partner,” Prince Abdulaziz told the visiting Japanese leader.

Mr Kishida also appears to have succeeded in broadening Japan’s economic links with the Gulf states beyond just purchasing oil and gas.

A favourite theme was his offer to help oil-producing Gulf states with their move towards cleaner energy sources.

“By combining respective strengths of Gulf states and Japan, oil producers in the Middle East will be transformed to global green energy hubs, exporting decarbonised energy and critical minerals,” Mr Kishida told reporters in the Qatari capital of Doha.

During the Japanese Premier’s trip, Japan and the Gulf Cooperation Council – the regional organisation of the six countries in the Gulf region: Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, Oman and Bahrain – announced the resumption of talks on a free trade agreement.

But bilateral talks on a free trade deal have periodically started and stalled over the past two decades and do not seem ripe for a breakthrough.

Nor is Japan’s footprint in the Middle East anywhere near as substantial as China’s.

China is already the region’s top trading partner. And earlier this year, the Beijing-based Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank opened its first overseas office in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

More spectacularly still, China brokered a rapprochement between long-time regional rivals Saudi Arabia and Iran, something the United States could not achieve.

All Arab governments are now wondering whether this new Chinese involvement in their region’s politics is a one-off affair, not to be followed by other Chinese diplomatic initiatives, or if it is merely a harbinger of things to come.

For the moment, there are no clear indications either way. What is evident, however, is that in a region where US influence was paramount, other actors are now vying for influence.

And although all the monarchs of the Gulf still have their holiday homes and personal investments in the West, their attention is now fixed firmly on the East.