Humanitarian aid agencies have warned that starvation deaths are ticking upward in Somalia amid a worsening drought, although the United Nations has not officially declared a famine there yet.

"It's important to remember that in 2011, at least half of the deaths happened before the famine was officially declared," said Ms Ariane Luff UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) head of strategy and resource mobilisation, referring to a famine that killed 250,000 people.

No official numbers for starvation deaths in Somalia are currently available, but aid workers are bracing themselves for the worst.

The country has, for the fourth consecutive rainy season in March to June, received inadequate rainfall.

"It seems that there will be a fifth failed rain season in the coming months, so this will be bigger than ever. It will stretch over a longer period. It will devastate the country and all that they rely on," said Mr Karl Schembri, the Norwegian Refugee Council's regional media adviser for East Africa and Yemen.

With livestock dying and harvests failing, food production has been adversely affected, making it more difficult for the country to feed itself as prices skyrocket.

The famine is also the main driver of mass migration of Somalians from drought-hit areas to urban internal displacement camps, where many will languish for years without a means to resume their old livelihood.

"We've seen fields which are burnt down because of the heat with no water. We've seen dead animals' skeletons, you see them on the fields. They've died because of no water. We've seen entire families, entire communities displaced - forced to leave their farms, forced to go into cities, where they have no source of livelihoods. They've been forced to beg to put food on the table. They have no money and it's absolutely desperate," said Mr Schembri.

In June, the cost for a household to meet basic food needs was at the highest national average in five years and in some regions between 50 per cent and 112 per cent higher than five-year averages, said Mr Petroc Wilton, World Food Programme (WFP) head of communications for Somalia.

"The Ukraine conflict has also contributed to these food price rises because Somalia depends on imports of some types of foods, or some feeds and so on," he told The Straits Times.

The UN's strict definition of famine means that certain thresholds for food consumption and livelihood change, nutritional status and mortality must be reached before it declares a famine. What Somalia is currently experiencing is, by the UN's classification, an acute food insecurity crisis.

Almost half of Somalia's 15.9 million people - 7.1 million, 1.5 of them children - are facing acute food insecurity and malnourishment.

Around 213,000 are already facing "catastrophic hunger levels", which correspond to famine conditions.

"When you go out, when you are in the towns, in the villages, the situation really is visibly very dire. I have been to towns that are half choked with windblown sand, towns where half the population or more has had to walk or drive or be carried some hundreds of kilometres, sometimes more, through rough desert conditions just in the hope of getting some assistance," said WFP's Mr Wilton.

Children have borne the brunt of the famine-like conditions in Somalia. "Children are particularly vulnerable because we have reduced access to milk, but also to other food, to clean water, sanitation and healthcare. So that could drive sharp increases in disease and malnutrition, which ultimately drives child deaths," said the FAO's Ms Luff.

Pope Francis had on Aug 14 warned that the Ukraine crisis was diverting attention from the problem of world hunger and called for urgent aid to stave off famine in Somalia.

Humanitarian efforts in Somalia are in full swing, but the aid agencies warned that the consequences of a failure to raise more funding could be catastrophic.

"My colleagues on the ground are there, they can reach people, but the aid available is nowhere near the scale needed on the ground," said Mr Schembri.

Mr Wilton said WFP does not have the resources it needs to maintain the scale of relief efforts, but noted that a couple of major donors have rallied in the past months to provide more funding.

Ms Luff said it was difficult to estimate what the final death toll could be in case a famine was declared in Somalia this year, but noted that FAO was looking at a funding gap of US$70 million (S$97.33 million) to reach 882,000 of those in most immediate need in rural areas with life-saving support.

Should the drought situation worsen and aid remain deficient, "the number of deaths is obviously likely to still go up", she said.