KINMEN, Taiwan – With thousands of rusty anti-landing spikes poking out of the sand, the beaches of Kinmen are clearly not meant for swimming.

The seemingly endless rows of metal spikes cut a striking image, one that is made even more mysterious by the thick coastal fog during my visit on a chilly weekend. 

Remnants like these, of Kinmen’s war-torn past, are everywhere in the Taiwan-controlled archipelago and they often show up in surprising places.

A popular tourist souvenir, for example, are the famously sharp knives crafted from used artillery shell casings. At one local bed-and-breakfast, an underground bunker lies hidden beneath a sunny-yellow rug in one of the guestrooms. 

Made up of 12 islands and islets, Kinmen has repeatedly been on the front lines between Taiwan and China, partly due to its geographical location.

It is situated off China’s coast, with one of its beaches just 3km across from the southern Chinese city of Xiamen.

Regular shelling from China, which sought to pile psychological pressure on Taiwanese troops, carried on till as recently as 1979. Beijing views Taiwan as a breakaway province and has never ruled out the use of force to reunify with it.

Today, Kinmen is quiet and calm, and has turned into a tourist destination for those with an appetite for war history – revealing the dilemma that faces many of its 142,000 residents. 

While they live under the constant threat of an invasion from their giant neighbour, they also seek the return of the big-spending Chinese tourists who used to visit in droves via ferry from Xiamen. 

These daily ferry services were shut down in 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic, wiping an estimated NT$6.4 billion (S$279 million) from Kinmen’s tourism industry. The ferry links have since been partially restored, but only for Kinmen residents and their Chinese spouses.

Local taxi driver Huang Mei-li, 62, whom I engaged as a driver and guide for my trip, mentioned more than once how her business has suffered tremendously in recent times. 

Indeed, during my two-night stay in Kinmen, most of the tourist sites I visited were deserted.

For example, restaurants and shops along the Yangzhai Old Street, which features 1960s-style shops and buildings, were all shut. 

But the area, which was used as the backdrop for the Taiwanese period movie Paradise In Service (2014), still makes for a lovely stroll, with plenty of Instagrammable spots, whether it is the old-fashioned beauty parlour or the photography studio. 

A five-minute walk away is the Jindong Movie Theatre, which boasts a fresh coat of paint but has retained its retro design. No shows were screening while I was there, but the space was open, so I could wander around, sit on the wooden benches and get a dose of nostalgia.

Next, Madam Huang drives me to Zhaishan Tunnel, a feat of engineering created during wartime to store as many as 42 military vessels.

I am in awe after learning that the 100m-long tunnel, which features a wide waterway, was mostly carved out of granite by soldiers with only simple tools and some small explosives. I walk on a path built along the water, studying the jagged edges of the walls in amazement. 

I make a mental note to return in October, when the tunnel is annually turned into an unlikely concert venue, with Chinese and Western classical musicians floating by on bamboo rafts. I can imagine how the huge chamber would make for naturally astounding acoustics. 

Another tunnel worth visiting is Shishan Howitzer Front, where a prized howitzer cannon used during the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis is on display. Tourists can catch live howitzer drill demonstrations there at scheduled showtimes almost daily.

I highly recommend it if you have burning questions for the staff, who are mostly Kinmen residents. They will be able to share experiences of life during wartime and why their home is particularly vulnerable amid the soaring cross-strait tensions of late. 

One site that makes that point equally clear is the Mashan Broadcasting and Observation Station, whose highest point is outfitted with binoculars, so tourists can see just how close China is from the Kinmen islands. On a clear day, the Chinese coast is visible to the naked eye.

During wartime, the station was used by Taiwanese troops to send – via various methods – propaganda messages to the Chinese army across the waters to convince them to surrender. 

Besides broadcasting speeches inviting enemy soldiers to defect, troops also played songs by Taiwan’s pride and glory – the late singer Teresa Teng.

Singapore connections 

But Kinmen is much more than just about war.

Singaporean tourists, in particular, may be delighted to discover its strong heritage links to the Lion City. 

During the early 20th century, many Kinmen locals travelled to different South-east Asian countries in search of better employment opportunities. According to official estimates, Singapore now boasts the largest overseas Kinmen population. 

As I wander through the Western-style buildings in the sleepy Shuitou Village, such connections are immediately clear. 

At the former Jinshui Elementary School, which has been turned into an exhibition space about the overseas Chinese experience, I learn about how Kinmen emigrants put down roots across Singapore and the region before returning to their ancestral home, bringing with them influences of colonial-style architecture and exotic foods. 

At a magnificent mansion guarded by the 11m-tall Deyue Tower just down the road, a long dining table has on display a Peranakan feast fashioned from plastic.

“This is Nonya food, most Taiwanese people do not know what that is,” says an attendant, pointing to the artificial food items of kueh, laksa and curries. 

My stomach growls, even if the food is all fake.

Rock oysters and craft beer 

While there is no Peranakan food served there, the attendant directs me to a popular local eatery, a five-minute walk away, that peddles the Kinmen speciality of rock oysters. 

The storefront has no signboard, but he says I will know it is the right place when I see it. He is right – I simply follow the aroma of its signature oyster omelette. 

I order a plate (NT$80) and am stunned to find it filled to the brim with fresh rock oysters, at least double the typical amount in the omelettes found in Taipei’s night markets. It is also crispier than Taipei’s version, and I gobble it up within minutes.

The same goes for its take on oyster mee sua soup (NT$80), which is served with more rock oysters than noodles. The broth is clear, but full of flavour after being cooked with so much fresh seafood.

By the time I finish my meal, the sun has set and I ask Madam Huang to drive me back to my bed-and-breakfast, which is a newly refurbished centuries-old house in the picturesque Qionglin Village.

Most of the one-storey buildings in the area have been turned into shops or guesthouses, and all of them look almost identical, featuring signature red brick walls and sloping tiled roofs. 

But the one I stay in, Narrative (www.narrativetw.com), easily stands out. It is just a few months old, and its 38-year-old manager, Mr Yorke Wu, has given it a beautiful makeover while retaining the traditional design.

Mr Wu, who is also a fashion photographer, handpicked every single lamp, chair, book and appliance for the six-bedroom house, and it is utterly charming. 

Even if you book only one room, guests are welcome to spend time in the multiple living areas, which includes two large open-air courtyards. 

As I sit outside on a wooden chair enjoying the breeze, I ask Mr Wu about the possibilities of war and he says it is the last thing on his mind. 

“Some travellers think it’s scary to come to Kinmen, but once they arrive, they realise how everyone here is so calm,” he says. 

With a bottle of Kinmen craft beer in my hand purchased from a convenience store nearby, I know how true it is.

* In Quest Of is a series on the joy of niche exploration amid the resurgence of international travel.

Getting there

Fly to Kinmen on a one-hour flight from Taipei’s Songshan Airport, which costs about $200 for a return trip on domestic carriers, including Uni Air and Mandarin Airlines. The planes are small and there are only a handful of flights each day, so book tickets online ahead of time.

Getting around

Travellers can rent a car or a scooter at the airport, but it is also easy to hire a taxi on the spot. Most of the local taxi drivers double as tour guides, so speak to them about engaging them for a day’s services if necessary.

In general, it costs about NT$3,000 for up to eight hours. Alternatively, there are buses that make pit stops at major tourist attractions, but these are infrequent. 

Stay

Kinmen has numerous standard business hotels, but I recommend staying in one of the bed-and-breakfasts in the quaint Qionglin Village, which is filled with traditional red brick houses. I stayed in a double room at Narrative, which cost NT$2,400 a night. 