KOTA, India - In April, Abhishek Anand, a 17-year-old student, moved more than 1,200km away from his home in Jharkhand, a state in eastern India. The destination was Kota in Rajasthan, a city in India’s west known for its coaching industry that prepares children for college entrance exams.

It was the first step in a journey that Abhishek hopes will lead him to a spot at one of the country’s Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), prestigious institutions that have produced leaders of top firms such as Google, Twitter, FedEx and IBM.

The road is arduous but Abhishek is determined.

Over the next two years, he will put himself through a gruelling schedule of nearly 12 hours of coaching and self-study every day, far away from family and friends in a crammed and dingy paying guest room in Kota, all in the hopes of cracking one of the world’s toughest exams.

This year, more than 500,000 students competed for 17,485 seats at the 23 IITs. When Abhishek sits the exam in 2025, he hopes his stint at Resonance, one of the many coaching institutes in India’s coaching hub of Kota, will give him an edge over others.

“There are all kinds of kids here – average, smart and extra-smart. You get to know where you stand with all this competition,” said the son of a real estate agent. “I want to take myself to the extra-smart level.”

Each year, more than 225,000 students like him study in Kota at one of the city’s 100-plus coaching institutes to shorten the odds of cracking the nation’s highly competitive engineering and medical college entrance exams.

It is a business model that has enjoyed roaring success since it took root in the 1980s, with parents in India dreaming of their children becoming doctors and engineers, sometimes even before they are born.

These exams, largely untainted by corruption and immune to string-pulling by the privileged, also offer a rare merit-based route to success for middle class and poor families who come up against barriers – such as marginalised caste backgrounds or generational poverty – to making social progress.

Many families do not even hesitate to take on crippling loans to ensure their children have that Kota edge while preparing for these exams that represent their best shot at escaping poverty.

The edifice of Kota’s coaching industry and its lure is built on inspirational stories such as the one from 2016 when a Hindi-medium educated welder’s son who made it, with coaching, to an IIT and went on to land a job at Microsoft with a reported annual starting pay of S$166,500.

A sleepy town that was once famed for its colourful silk-cotton sarees is better known today as India’s coaching capital – a trait that is evident the moment you roll into its railway station.

Advertisements for coaching institutions featuring faces of venerated national top students and rockstar-like teachers – one of them with the pi symbol tattooed on his right bicep – follow you around.

They strafe you on its platforms and pedestrian overbridge. They holler at you from its public announcement system. Outside on the city’s roads, they creep up on you on cars and buses, and stare down at you from malls. They eclipse news on the front page. There is no escaping them.

Coaching is synonymous with Kota, and Kota with coaching.

It has also spawned an array of associated services such as paying guest accommodation, dedicated hostels, tiffin services and basement reading rooms where students can rent a desk by the hour to study.

Even fun has not gone untouched; an ice-cream parlour lists poor test performance and exam worry as reasons for a frozen treat.

An illegal but widespread culture of “dummy schools” has come up as well to meet the needs of students who are enrolled full-time at these coaching institutes.

These are regular schools that give students ample leeway – in return for a fee – to skip classes entirely and focus on coaching. The students use their accreditation at these schools only to sit school-leaving examinations in grade 12, which every student must pass for higher studies.

Shounak Kumar (not his real name), 16, has been enrolled in one such dummy school in the city for four years with his parents’ blessing, while he concentrates on getting into an IIT.

Living away from his parents in Gaya, in Bihar, Shounak is studying at the Allen Career Institute, the city’s biggest coaching firm. It is not an IIT he is eyeing though, but the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States.

“IIT is the best for India, but if I go to MIT, it is the best in the world,” he said, hurrying to his afternoon coaching classes.

Regular school-going pleasures like making friends are not his priority. “There’s no point making too many friends. I don’t have the time,” he added.

Families pay more than 300,000 rupees (S$5,000) each year to have their children live and study in Kota, oiling the wheels of a coaching business that generates an annual revenue of more than 30 billion rupees each year.

The Allen Career Institute alone coaches more than 100,000 students across 22 campus buildings in the city, its trademark green-black umbrellas and bags a recurring motif in Kota’s landscape. As many as 250 students can be crammed in one class.

The industry had modest origins, beginning with classes for just a handful of students around the dining table of Mr Vinod Bansal, who died in May 2021 aged 71.

He was a former mechanical engineer who switched to tutoring at home in the late 1970s after being diagnosed with muscular dystrophy.

He introduced his students to daily problem practice sheets – a common cram school practice now – that would test them on the entire syllabus covered, forcing them to revise past lessons while also focusing on the newer ones. When several of his students cleared the IIT entrance exam, his fame spread, enabling him to launch a flourishing test-prep business.

Mr Sachin Jha, 51, a graduate of IIT Delhi who wrote a biography of Mr Bansal, his former teacher, said modern-day coaching institutes have converted what was once “a test of intelligence into a test of memory”.

In the past, students were quizzed in the exams with unexpected takes on scientific principles to determine their thinking skills but, over the years, coaching institutes have worked out “all the twists and turns that can be given to any concept”, the Kota-based lawyer added.

“They lay it out in front of the students, who need to be just intelligent enough to mug it all up.”

Bansal Classes, which Mr Bansal founded in 1981, as well as other older institutes have today been edged out by newer and more aggressive players.

“Earlier, the interest of students was above anything else,” said Mr Pramod Maheswari, a former IIT student and the CEO of Career Point, a coaching institute founded in 1993. “Now, the industry has become absolutely commercial, a machine to make money.”

New players allow anyone willing to pay the fee to be enrolled for coaching, doing away with screening tests that earlier ensured a level of calibre in students.

“The institutes know those who have been scoring 60 or so in their school exams will not be able to compete with the 90-plus guys, no matter how much they try. Yet, they are given the hope they can make it, exploiting these children just for earnings, and not for learning,” said Mr Arvind Gupta, a Kota-based journalist who has tracked the industry for many years.

Often, institutes make misleading claims.

In 2020, as many as six firms claimed that Soyeb Aftab, a student who topped the national medical college entrance exam with a perfect score of 720, had been coached by them. He had attended classes at only one of them, but the others claimed him as their distance-learning pupil – a nuance either completely hidden or buried deep in their ads.

Industry insiders said that coaching institutes can claim top rankers as their students in ads, even if they registered with them just for additional coaching material or mock tests.

“Some even have agents who approach bright students studying at other institutions before entrance exams with offers – maybe a free tablet or educational material – to enrol them in distance learning programmes just so that their photos can be used for publicity in case they secure a top rank,” said a senior representative from one of the city’s top coaching institutions who wished to remain anonymous.

Another coaching institution representative, who also wished to remain anonymous, showed ST WhatsApp messages he had received from agents allegedly hawking a few of the top 50 rank holders in 2022 and 2023 to coaching institutes for use in advertisements as their DLP students.

Potential national toppers are recruited each year from schools across the country, placed in privileged groups in Kota along with incentives such as full tuition waivers, premium hostel facilities and personal attention from teachers.

It is around these two categories of students that Kota’s thriving business model is built – the elite “rankers” who bring in students, and the “bankers” who bring in the money, said Mr Maheshwari.

Another worrying trend is the poaching of high-profile teachers, along with their students. “It is too dirty to be in this trade,” added Mr Maheshwari, who has cut down his involvement in coaching and diversified his business to run schools and universities.

Recently, Kota attracted bad press for another reason – suicides among its students because of academic stress and dejection. Crushed by their parents’ unrealistic expectations and the city’s high-octane competitive environment, more than 120 coaching students in the city have killed themselves since 2011.

As offline classes resumed in 2022, 15 children died in suicide attempts. The number this year has already reached 14, evidence of an entrenched culture that encourages fierce competition but without the support system necessary to handle the pressure it produces.

Students said there is the lingering dread of falling behind in classes just because of an evening out with friends, the loneliness that comes from living away from one’s family for the first time, and a struggle to develop friendships when you view each other as competitors. All this makes Kota harsh, even for the hardwired.

“If you fall behind, you begin to think of how much your parents are investing and how you are not giving the commensurate output,” said Ms Simmy Upadhyay, 19, from Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh, who was in Kota earlier this year preparing for her medical college entrance exams.

“Suicidal thoughts come, and this is why it becomes depressing. It becomes worse when you see others doing well.”

Even the best can fail to cope. “Toppers come here from across the country and when there is competition among these toppers, some naturally fall behind. This causes a big setback to the child,” added Dr M. L. Agrawal, a psychiatrist based in the city.

For children from less well-off families who perhaps mortgaged their homes and took out loans to send them to Kota, the pressure to show results is even more intense.

“We feel a sense of regret within us and question ourselves about what we are doing here. Will we be able to pay back our parents as a successful person? That doubt lingers,” said Mr Ravi Singh, 18, a student from Bihar.

Following the series of suicides in 2022, the local administration in December released a set of guidelines for coaching institutes. These included directions to avoid misleading advertisements as well as a cap on the teacher-student ratio at 1:100, but these and several other measures continue to be flouted.

Mr Om Prakash Bunkar, the top government officer for Kota district, said the guidelines, which have no legal backing, cannot be “forced” on the institutes.

“Once they are included in an Act, we can take action, even penalise them and withdraw their recognition,” he added.

Such a measure was proposed in January in a draft Bill, but few think it will be passed by the Rajasthan state government, given the coaching industry’s clout.

Mr Sameer Bansal, CEO and MD of Bansal Classes, recommends checks such as a common government testing agency that screens students before coaching admission and validation of claims in advertisements by an independent auditor. “There has to be a lot of ethics in this business and norms for everyone to follow,” he said.

But the more difficult long-term fix involves expanding India’s higher education opportunities, reducing the inequity in accessing them and producing job opportunities necessary to absorb new entrants to the country’s workforce each year.

In one of the temples in Kota, messages pleading for divine help are scribbled by students on the walls, making it an open-air installation of India’s youth’s anxiety. A note, scribbled in green, stood out. It said: “Please help in the process of making my parents proud.”