India’s urban population is estimated to grow past 800 million by 2050, up from 410 million in 2014, according to the UN, prompting a greater need for “smarter” cities, which can improve the quality of life by harnessing technology.

INDORE - It has been a long day at work for Mr Aakash Patidar, a 21-year-old who is employed at a hydroponic farm in the central Indian city of Indore. As is his daily habit by now, he gets onto the M22 city bus at around 6pm for his ride back home after growing vegetables such as Romaine lettuce and kale.

The M22 bus is one of the 130-odd city buses that run on Bio-CNG, a compressed natural gas derived from the kitchen and other biodegradable waste produced by Indore’s estimated 3.4 million residents.

“It feels good to know that my waste can run buses such as this one,” said Mr Patidar, as the vehicle, its two sides emblazoned with an advertisement for a betel nut chewing mixture, fills up with commuters.

“It’s helping to manage our waste better and creating a revenue model out of it, in addition to reducing pollution and creating jobs,” he added.

This project, to seek a sustainable use for Indore’s biodegradable or wet waste, is one of the city’s many innovative projects under the wide ambit of its Smart Cities Mission (SCM) interventions.

Launched in 2015 by the Indian government, the SCM seeks to drive economic growth and improve the quality of life in cities across the country by “enabling local area development and harnessing technology… that leads to smart outcomes”, according to its website.

The mission, run in partnership with local state government and urban bodies, covers chosen areas in 100 cities, home to more than 130 million.

In May, India’s Housing and Urban Affairs Minister Hardeep Singh Puri described the cities as “real incubators of the new urban India”, adding that the country’s urban future will “draw heavily from the innovations being nurtured in these smart cities”.

With a budget of around 1.79 trillion rupees (S$29.2 billion), the cities have undertaken an array of SCM projects, including the creation of cycling and walking paths, the revitalisation of street hawking zones, solar energy deployment, lake revival, green public transport infrastructure and the launch of start-up incubation centres.

Ahmedabad in Gujarat has attached RFID, or radio frequency identification, tags to more than 60,000 cattle in the city, making it easier to track down their owners when they stray onto roads.

Tirupati in Andhra Pradesh has created a digital platform allowing artists to share contemporary designs with traditional craftsmen.

Indore, which has a robust segregated door-to-door waste collection programme, has set up multiple initiatives under the SCM to effectively handle its estimated 1,200 tonnes of daily waste.

Residents in the city sort their garbage not just into dry and wet categories but also those such as electronic, hazardous and plastic waste.

“Solid waste management is an integral part of the Smart Cities Mission and cities cannot be considered smart as long as they don’t achieve effective waste management,” said Mr Nitesh Kumar Tripathi, the project head for the bio-CNG plant in Indore.

Inaugurated in February 2022 under a public-private partnership agreement between Indore Clean Energy, a private company, and Indore Municipal Corporation, the plant claims to be Asia’s largest.

It processes around 550 tonnes of wet waste daily to produce fuel for vehicles, bio-fertilisers and biomass fuel.

This satellite image from Google Earth shows the site of the Bio-CNG Plant in Indore in October 2015. A compost plant of the Indore Municipal Corporation stood there then, which was later redeveloped into the Bio-CNG plant.

This image was taken in May 2023, after it was inaugurated in February 2022.

“Only around 1 per cent to 2 per cent of the wet waste received is sent as rejects to the landfill because of the city’s high quality of waste segregation at source,” added Mr Tripathi.

Together with Nepra Resource Management, another private company, the city has also set up a 300 tonne material recovery facility under the SCM, which sorts Indore’s dry waste into several recyclable categories and transforms non-recyclables into refuse-derived fuel for the cement industry.

“Nothing is sent to the landfill from here,” said Mr Pranshu Gangrade, an officer at the facility.

A command and control centre set up in the city through the SCM even houses an integrated solid waste management system that keeps a hawk’s eye on more than 600 GPS-tracked garbage collection vehicles to ensure they remain punctual, follow allotted routes and offload their waste at designated spots.

It is one such garbage truck that rolls into a residential neighbourhood one morning in July, playing a catchy sanitation-related jingle through a megaphone perched atop the driver’s cabin.

It is a cue for residents of Indore’s Sukhliya neighbourhood to put their best foot forward.

As the truck moves along a lane lined with independent houses, residents troop out with their garbage, pre-segregated into as many as six categories.

They dump their waste faithfully into one of the six allotted compartments.

“It is not right if somebody else has to sort my waste,” said Mr Rajendra Kumar Azare, 55, after discarding his household’s wet and dry garbage. “Sanitation workers are also humans.”

It is a rare demonstration of civic responsibility in India, where waste segregation at source has failed to take off, leading to towering landfills in some of its cities.

Indore, which has achieved this transformation through several years of sustained public awareness campaigns, was judged to be India’s cleanest city in October 2022 for the sixth time in a row in the central government’s annual cleanliness survey.

"(Indore’s residents) don’t litter and when they see others doing so, they stop them." MR ANOP BANWARI, 47, RUNS A TRAVEL AGENCY IN INDORE.

It is a laurel the city’s officials and residents are fiercely proud of and defend as tenaciously as a football club would its championship trophy.

“Indore’s residents are genuinely proud of their top spot,” said Mr Anop Banwari, 47, who runs a travel agency in the city. “They don’t litter and when they see others doing so, they stop them.”

Mr Divyank Singh, chief executive of Indore Smart City Development, a special entity set up to spearhead the SCM in the city, said he expects all the 134 projects under the mission in Indore to be completed by the end of 2023.

“The work is easy and free-flowing here in Indore because we have a good number of contractors who are doing the same job. So competition is high, our rates are low and our pace of work is very high,” he added.

But, while cities such as Indore, along with others such as Surat, Coimbatore and Bhubaneswar, are at the top of the SCM league, many other participating cities have struggled to conceive ideas and utilise the mission’s funds.

Work under SCM was scheduled to be wrapped up by 2019-20, but as at July 28, more than a fourth of the 8,023 SCM projects across the country are yet to be completed.

Deadlines have been extended repeatedly, with the latest one now set for June 2024.

The Covid-19 pandemic did delay progress, but various other factors, including inadequate managerial, technical, and financial capabilities, have also thrown a spanner in the works.

Dr Rumi Aijaz, a senior fellow at the Observer Research Foundation in New Delhi, identified a lack of availability of land in India’s cities – due to public encroachment on government land, among other reasons – and inadequate financing as two key factors that have held back progress.

According to guidelines, the state government and local urban bodies have to match the contribution they receive from the central government for the mission.

“But in many cases, resource mobilisation at lower levels has not been very encouraging,” Dr Aijaz said.

The current scope of SCM also pales in comparison with the country’s urbanisation needs.

India’s urban population is estimated to touch 814 million by 2050, up from 410 million in 2014, according to the United Nations, prompting a greater need than ever for “smarter” cities.

Dr Aijaz said the mission duration should be extended and its coverage expanded to include entire cities and not just certain zones of the 100 that were chosen.

“This way, multiple civic agencies responsible for various development activities in Indian cities can adopt an overall Smart Cities Mission approach and coordinate among themselves for better outcomes,” he said.