NEW DELHI – India’s decision to buy three submarines and co-develop a combat aircraft and helicopter engines with France, announced during Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to the European country, is boosting defence cooperation between India and the West.

India is keen to curtail its reliance on Russian weapons.

But in spite of deals with France and earlier the United States, its dependence on Russia will most likely continue for at least another decade, defence and security analysts predict.

During Mr Modi’s two-day visit to France on Thursday and Friday, the two countries signed an agreement for France to supply three Scorpene-class submarines to the Indian Navy in addition to an earlier six that were manufactured in India, with the last one launched in 2022.

The two nations also agreed to co-develop a combat aircraft as well as engines for heavy-lift helicopters, which can carry weights of over 50 tonnes. 

France and India are also working “towards adopting a Roadmap on Defence Industrial Cooperation”, according to a Horizon 2047 road map document released after talks between Mr Modi and French President Emmanuel Macron.

“Defence ties have always been the basic foundation of our relations. France is an important partner in ‘Make in India’,” said Mr Modi on Friday, underlining his country’s key aim of pushing co-production to boost domestic manufacturing, thereby cutting imports.

India is the world’s largest importer of arms, with an 11 per cent share of global arms imports between 2018 and 2022, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (Sipri).

The country has also been pushing its Western partners to share defence technology.

During Mr Modi’s visit to the US in June, American firm General Electric signed an agreement with Hindustan Aeronautics to jointly produce fighter jet engines in India for the Tejas, the Indian Air Force’s light combat aircraft.

Under the agreement, General Electric agreed to transfer 80 per cent of the involved technologies, as US officials have underlined how Washington wants to support New Delhi’s military modernisation through technology transfer.

India is also looking to acquire MQ-9B SeaGuardian drones from the US, even as the two countries are planning a Defence Industrial Cooperation Roadmap to facilitate co-production of advanced defence systems and collaborative research, testing and prototyping of projects.

Modernising the Indian military has been made urgent by festering border troubles with China and Pakistan.

Traditionally, India has bought weapons and technology from Russia, the only country willing to sell weapons to India after independence from the British in 1947. Jets, tanks and missile systems of Russian origin form part of crucial Indian weaponry, with Russia remaining India’s largest supplier of weapons with a total share of imports of 45 per cent between 2018 and 2022, according to Sipri.

France comes second, with a 29 per cent share, and the US is third, at 11 per cent. 

Even before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, India was diversifying its weapons suppliers, purchasing from France, the US and Israel.

The war in Ukraine is seen as underlining the need for India to continue diversifying, following disruption to delivery of weapons including spares for Sukhoi Su-30MKI and MiG-29 jets, according to the Indian Air Force.

“There is no doubt the West would like India to be weaned away from Russian dependence on military hardware. There is also no doubt India would like to be self-reliant. We also don’t want all eggs in one basket,” said retired general S.B. Asthana, a strategic and military analyst at the United Service Institution of India think-tank.

“But for the next 10 years, certainly Russia will remain the largest supplier of weapons. After that, maybe our atmanirbhar bharat (vision of a self-reliant India) will pick up, as well as diversification. But in this effort for self-reliance, India requires certain critical technologies.”

Much depends on how much the West is willing to transfer technology to India, and whether the US will continue to hold back on critical technologies.

A 2012 Defence Technology and Trade Initiative with the US was not seen to have taken off amid issues including a lack of trust and regulations in India.

This has been replaced by the Initiative on Critical and Emerging Technologies, even as India has undertaken multiple reforms, including opening up the defence sector to greater foreign investment.

At present, trust between the two countries is high amid strategic convergence over the rise of China, and the US’ desire to tap the growing Indian economy.

Still, big-ticket defence items that India has been able to manufacture domestically involved Russian collaboration. 

In 2022, India inked a US$375 million (S$495.6 million) deal with the Philippines to sell BrahMos missiles, a joint venture with Russia, with the weapons manufactured domestically.

“The US will transfer sensitive technology to India, but not the highest level, which it does not transfer to anyone,” noted Mr Manoj Joshi, distinguished fellow at the Observer Research Foundation, a New Delhi-based think-tank. 

“As for boosting domestic production, the challenge is for India to display the ability to create companies and organisations that can effectively absorb this technology to the point where they can begin their own chain of innovation.” 