JAKARTA - With the top three presidential hopefuls neck and neck in electability polls, the outcome of Indonesia’s 2024 election may hinge on the popularity of each candidate’s running mate.

Thin margins of support have seen the presidential candidates in a game of musical chairs of sorts in opinion polls, with no contender wielding dominance like in the previous four elections.

In comparison, incumbent President Joko Widodo – who is serving his second and final five-year term – enjoyed a 20-percentage-point lead in opinion surveys half a year before the 2014 election that he eventually won.

The latest survey involving more than 1,200 respondents across Indonesia’s provinces in early April put Defence Minister Prabowo Subianto, 71, as the front runner with 30.3 per cent support. He was followed by Central Java Governor Ganjar Pranowo, 54, with 26.9 per cent, according to the survey by noted Jakarta-based pollster Lembaga Survei Indonesia. Former Jakarta governor Anies Baswedan, 53, had 25.3 per cent backing.

Mr Ganjar, who led in earlier voting-intention polls, dropped a notch after upsetting Indonesian football fans – who number in the tens of millions – by refusing to host any 2023 Fifa U-20 World Cup matches in Central Java that involved the Israel team. It led to Indonesia losing its hosting rights – a significant embarrassment for the country and its football.

“Uncertainty is higher compared with previous presidential elections because no one holds a dominant position among the top three. Hence, the choice of a vice-presidential candidate would be a very big deciding factor,” said political observer Burhanuddin Muhtadi in a recent discussion on Jakarta-based TVOne.

On the flip side, the wrong running mate could cost a presidential candidate an “electoral downgrade”, Mr Aditya Perdana, executive director at Algoritma Research and Consulting, told The Straits Times.

Observers have pinpointed Tourism Minister Sandiaga Uno, 53, and West Java Governor Ridwan Kamil, 51, as potential running mates for Mr Ganjar. Mr Sandiaga is a familiar face to cadres from Indonesian Islamic-leaning parties, while Mr Ridwan could well complement Mr Ganjar, who is weak in West Java, Indonesia’s most populous province.

For Mr Anies, the vice-presidential pick could be Mr Agus Harimurti Yudhoyono, 44, chairman of the Democratic Party, or East Java Governor Khofifah Indar Parawansa, 57. Ms Khofifah is a senior figure in Nahdlatul Ulama, Indonesia’s largest Islamic organisation, and is very close to both the elites who back Mr Ganjar and those who back Mr Anies.

State-Owned Enterprises Minister Erick Thohir, 52, and Golkar chairman Airlangga Hartarto, 60, have also been trying to position themselves to be picked as running mate for either Mr Ganjar or Mr Prabowo.

Mr Erick comes from a very wealthy family and was a major donor to Mr Widodo’s previous presidential campaigns, while Mr Airlangga holds a trump card with Golkar, Indonesia’s oldest party which has highly experienced politicians and the widest network.

Mr Burhanuddin said: “The key question is which vice-presidential hopeful has a bigger hand to leverage Ganjar, Prabowo or Anies. My guess is the one who has potential to help court support in big population provinces East Java and Central Java, and the one who is affiliated with Nahdlatul Ulama.”

University of Gadjah Mada political analyst Dodi Ambardi told The Straits Times: “A vice-presidential candidate would play an important role and could add three to five percentage points... that could prove decisive in final counting.”