LONDON – In seeking Italy’s exit from its “atrocious” participation in China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) – the strongest indication thus far that such a move is on the cards – Italian Defence Minister Guido Crosetto said the main challenge for Rome is finding a way to “walk back” from BRI commitments without inflicting severe damage on the country’s broader relations with Beijing.

It will be a delicate process.

Current talk about Italy’s withdrawal from the BRI is happening just as Italian exports to China are soaring.

They jumped by an astonishing 92.5 per cent year on year in the first quarter of 2023 to €7.1 billion (S$10.4 billion), and although the trend is temporary and mainly driven by a short-term surge in pharmaceutical exports, this makes it awkward for the Italian government to pull the plug on the relationship at the moment.

Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni is also keen to avoid antagonising China; she wants to portray any decision to leave the BRI as a purely technical matter, disentangled from any political motivations. 

Already, hawks in China have pointed the finger at the United States as motivating Italy to exit the BRI.

“This also reflects Italy’s current dilemma: It wants Washington’s political recognition, but it is unwilling to give up economic cooperation with China, and it does not want to pick just one,” said the nationalistic Global Times in an editorial.

Ms Meloni does not have that long to decide: Italy’s BRI membership is due to automatically renew for five years in March 2024 unless Rome pulls out soon.

While the words that Mr Crosetto used in an interview with newspaper Corriere della Sera published on Sunday went well beyond what other Italian politicians are prepared to say in public, the revelation of his government’s intention does not come as a surprise.

Since it came to power in 2022, the far-right Italian government of Prime Minister Meloni has made no secret of its intentions to pull back from a close strategic partnership with China.

In a recent media interview, Ms Meloni said it was a “paradox” that although Italy was part of the BRI, it was not the Group of Seven (G-7) country with the strongest trading links to China.

“This shows that you can have good relations and trading partnerships outside the BRI,” she pointed out.

Other senior Italian officials have also stepped up their criticism of the country’s membership in China’s flagship infrastructure project.

Mr Stefano Stefanini, a retired top diplomat, said that if Rome does not withdraw from the BRI, it will risk a clash with the US.

“Italy has to decide which side it is on,” he wrote in recent newspaper contributions.

And although little has been said in public, it is understood that Ms Meloni discussed the question when she visited Washington for talks with US President Joe Biden on July 27.

Italy’s decision to join the BRI, taken in March 2019, was regarded as a significant diplomatic victory for China.

This was in part because Italy was the first country in the G-7 to do so, and in part because its then Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte prided himself on being a close friend of Donald Trump, the then US President, who was openly belligerent towards Beijing.

Yet Mr Conte ignored pressure from Washington and European colleagues such as French President Emmanuel Macron, who warned Italy that joining the BRI could turn countries into “vassal states”.

Italy signed up not only to 29 different cooperation areas grouped in the BRI but also to broader pledges of friendship, such as the return of hundreds of Chinese cultural objects held at that time by Italian museums.

Economic interests loomed high.

“There is a lot of ‘Made in China’ coming into Italy and too little ‘Made in Italy’ that goes into China,” was how an Italian minister described the decision, adding that Italy hoped for “a substantial and gradual increase of exports” to “balance out the trade imbalances”.

But until 2023, this just did not happen.

According to official statistics, Chinese exports to Italy increased by 51 per cent from 2019 to 2022, while China’s imports from Italy rose only 26 per cent during the same period.

China’s promise to invest massively in key Italian infrastructure projects such as the ports of Genoa and Trieste did not come to fruition either. And other sources of friction arose.

ChemChina, a Chinese chemical conglomerate, bought a 37 per cent share in tyre-maker Pirelli, one of Italy’s last remaining global manufacturing companies.

When the transaction was completed, Pirelli’s executives hailed it as a “wonderful marriage”.

Subsequently, however, ChemChina was absorbed into Sinochem, another major Chinese company, and Pirelli’s subsidiaries in China were ordered to submit all managerial decisions to Communist Party of China committees operating within their workforce.

Mr Marco Tronchetti Provera, the Italian tycoon who leads Pirelli, is now publicly warning that Chinese investors “are dangerous” to his company, and he has dragged the Italian government into his commercial dispute.

No doubt, the US and China sceptics in Europe will say that this is precisely the situation they had warned of when Italy and China shook hands on the BRI deal in the first place.