KUALA LUMPUR – Malaysia’s multi-ethnic coalition government has recently moved to implement more conservative policies in what analysts consider an attempt at placating the country’s Malay/Muslim majority.

On May 25, the government announced its plan to table a controversial amendment that will raise the syariah courts’ criminal powers after getting Cabinet approval.

Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim has signalled to voters and allies alike that his administration will protect the community’s interests, experts have said.

Islamist groups, including opposition alliance Perikatan Nasional, vehemently criticised the government after it dropped an appeal in April against a 2021 High Court verdict that allowed non-Muslims to use the word “Allah” in educational publications.

Opposition rhetoric that Datuk Seri Anwar’s ruling Pakatan Harapan (PH) is incapable of protecting Malay/Muslim interests prompted a response.

On May 13 and 14, the Malaysian authorities raided 11 Swatch Group stores over the sale of Pride-themed rainbow watches, which had colours of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community flag.

Home Minister Saifuddin Nasution Ismail on Monday said the letters “LGBT” were also found on the dials of the confiscated watches, prompting a denial from the Swiss watchmaker on the same day.

Swatch said: “In relation to the recently published news stating that all confiscated Swatch watches bear LGBT wording, Swatch Malaysia does not agree with the statement.

“The concerned watches are from this year’s collection and do not bear any LGBT wording on dial, strap or case. The only watch confiscated with LGBT wording is from last year’s collection.”

Swatch Group chief executive Nick Hayek said the company would take legal action to recover its confiscated watches, adding that the watches’ “message of peace and love was not harmful to anyone”, Reuters cited Swiss newspaper Tages-Anzeiger as reporting last week.

Mr Peter Mumford, South-east Asia practice head of political risk consultancy Eurasia Group, said: “The Swatch raids in Malaysia are a reminder that there are, perhaps, increasingly complex identity politics in the country that can be challenging for foreign investors to navigate.”

The raid on the Swatch stores is part of a strategy to stop the opposition bloc from capitalising on racial and religious tensions, and instead repurpose Islamic issues to bolster the government’s own image, said Mr Halmie Azrie Abdul Halim, a senior analyst at Vriens & Partners, a government regulatory affairs and political risk consultancy.

The administration’s shift is also aimed at placating Umno, an ally in Mr Anwar’s unity government, and its grassroots leaders.

“The raids also show that the government is serious about LGBT issues – or any other sensitive Malay/Muslim topic,” said Mr Halmie.

“They let Umno tell its supporters that the party can champion Malay causes, while still playing the role of critic in the PH-led government. It keeps Umno relevant and on board in this unity government until the next general election.”

Earlier in 2023, Mr Anwar, who has been jailed twice on sodomy charges, said his administration would never recognise LGBT, secularism and communism.

“Sometimes, these politicians will say that if Anwar becomes prime minister, Islam will be ruined, secularism and communism will gain a foothold, and LGBT will be recognised,” he said in a televised interview with public broadcaster RTM in January.

“This is a delusion. Of course, it will never happen under my administration.”

According to pollster Merdeka Center in February, both Mr Anwar and his government had lower support among Malays compared with non-Malays.

Despite receiving an approval rating of more than 70 per cent from other races, Mr Anwar had a 60 per cent score among Malays, while his government had only 48 per cent approval, said Merdeka Center.

The government now appears to be overcompensating for the perceived lack of Islamic credentials in a bid to outdo rivals on the Malay ground and counter rising race and religious rhetoric, said KRA Group director of strategy Amir Fareed Rahim.

Even if it means taking on parties within the PH government.

On Wednesday, Umno supreme council member Mohd Puad Zarkashi criticised Economy Minister Rafizi Ramli, who is deputy president of Mr Anwar’s Parti Keadilan Rakyat, for his lacklustre performance in managing the economy of the country.

The criticism shows that Umno has been given leeway to take potshots at party leaders within the unity government, as no other PH leader came to Mr Rafizi’s defence.

Mr Anwar’s government is also hoping to show that contrary to opposition rhetoric, the Chinese-based Democratic Action Party (DAP), a key component in PH, does not call the shots in his administration’s decision-making.

In a bid to appease Malay fishermen, Mr Anwar requested that the DAP’s Penang state government downsize the controversial Penang South Island reclamation project from three islands to one.

Environmentalists and fishermen have long warned that the reclamation of the islands can be detrimental to marine biodiversity, possibly destroying coastal fishing, and affect livelihoods.

The project, which had been in limbo since 2015, was approved in 2019 when Tun Dr Mahathir Mohamad was prime minister under a PH administration.

Whether these moves are sufficient to sway voters remains to be seen. KRA Group’s Mr Amir believes the electorate will look beyond token gestures to see if their lives are improved as a result.

“The need to appease the Malay ground has led the government on an overdrive to bolster its Islamic credentials,” he said.

“Beyond rhetoric and sloganeering, economic issues must be prioritised, and it is essential for the government to commit to good morals and values.”