BEIJING - Jaws dropped at the opening of China’s Parliament in 2022, when Premier Li Keqiang left out the word “peaceful” when referencing China’s goal of eventual reunification with Taiwan, which Beijing claims as its own.

Speculation swirled among China watchers then, over whether Beijing had abandoned its policy of “peaceful reunification” and would resort to a military invasion. The policy was introduced in 1979 as a condition for Washington’s switching of diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing under a “one China” policy.

But on Sunday, there were sighs of relief. In his swan song annual work report presentation as Premier, Mr Li renewed Beijing’s longstanding pledge to seek “peaceful reunification”.

And so, in retrospect, the omission in 2022 appears to have been unintentional.

Analysts closely parse the Premier’s work report every year for signs of any departure from China’s long-standing cross-Strait relations policy and its carefully-developed terminology to maintain the balance between its “red lines” towards Taiwan and the island’s domestic developments and the broader geopolitical environment.

While Mr Li reinstated the term “peaceful reunification” on Sunday, it was noted that his speech featured two omissions. One was most probably deliberate, and one was likely not.

First, the unintentional omission. Back in 2022, Mr Li said that China “firmly opposes foreign interference” on the Taiwan issue, which Beijing considers as an internal affair. He did not single out the United States, but the point was clear.

But on Sunday, Mr Li made no reference to foreign interference. This was rather curious, given the ramp up of high-level visits between Washington and Taipei in recent months.

There is also the US’ Taiwan Policy Act of 2022, which proposes giving Taiwan US$4.5 billion (S$6 billion) in military aid, if cleared by Congress.

Could the lack of mention of “foreign interference” be another accidental omission? It seems probable. Beijing has a longstanding foreign policy of mutual non-interference, and the leadership usually takes every opportunity to drive home this point, not least at a high-profile forum like the National People’s Congress.

The second omission is likely to be more calculated.

Mr Li, like before, made no mention of the “one country, two systems” formula that saw Hong Kong revert to Chinese rule in 1997 with promises of autonomy after more than a century of British colonial rule. This is even though the concept remains Beijing’s official policy for how reunification with Taiwan could take place.

President Xi Jinping in his 20th party congress speech last October had said: “The policies of peaceful reunification and one country, two systems are the best way to realise reunification across the Taiwan Strait.”

But Beijing is well aware that the “one country, two systems” overture has no traction in Taiwan, especially after the 2019 protests in Hong Kong, which sometimes turned violent and resulted in ever-tighter controls from the central government.

More importantly, the omission is likely due to the timing of Taiwan’s presidential election, scheduled to be held next year.

History has shown that any threats or pressure, implied or otherwise, from Beijing would drive Taiwanese voters to throw their support behind the pan-green Democratic Progressive Party.

Ahead of Taiwan’s presidential elections in 2000, then Chinese premier Zhu Rongji warned the island’s voters of “regret” if they choose a pro-independence leader. But the threat backfired with Mr Chen Shui-bian of the DPP romping to victory, ending five decades of rule by the pro-China Kuomintang.

Mr Li’s words on Sunday were warmer. He welcomed Taiwanese to jump on the bandwagon and “jointly promote Chinese culture and advance China’s rejuvenation”.