TAIPEI – Retired Chinese literature professor Lu Cheng-hui stays indoors on most days, not stepping out of his Taipei apartment if he can help it.

“What’s the point of going out when I feel so out of touch with society,” the 75-year-old says, sounding resigned.

It boils down to his political ideology. Dr Lu is part of a Taiwanese minority who support the self-ruled island’s unification with China – and having such views, he says, means there is “no place for me out there”.

In particular, he dreams of living under a government run by the Communist Party of China (CPC), and sees Taiwan as a Chinese province. 

Beijing views the island as a breakaway province to be reunified with the mainland, and has ramped up military and diplomatic pressures on Taiwan in recent years to prevent any move towards formal independence by the government of the independence-leaning Democratic Progressive Party.

But for many Taiwanese, who are able to choose their own leaders under the island’s democratic system, the idea of their home falling under the control of its authoritarian neighbour has remained hugely unpopular – so much so that some proponents of unification say they are boycotted or shunned.

“All of my old friends have stopped talking to me because if we ever broached politics, we’d start arguing,” says Dr Lu.

In February, two known champions of unification died, further reducing an ever-dwindling voice in Taiwan.

One was the Buddhist monk Hsing Yun, who sought to prevent conflict between China and Taiwan through religious exchanges; the other, political scientist Chu Yun-han from Taiwan’s Academia Sinica, who believed China’s economic rise was helped by its political system.

China’s Taiwan Affairs Office expressed its “deepest condolences” over the two deaths, commending Hsing Yun for his “firm support of reunification” and Professor Chu for his “commitment to promoting national rejuvenation”. 

In Taiwan, people paid their respects online, but many said they disagreed with them politically.

According to the latest data from a long-running poll by Taipei’s National Chengchi University, only 1.2 per cent of the Taiwanese population want to see unification as soon as possible. That is down from the already minuscule 4.4 per cent of people who said so in 1994, when the survey was first conducted. 

Another 6 per cent say they want to see Taiwan move towards eventual unification. These figures compare with the 5.6 per cent who want independence as soon as possible and 25.4 per cent who want eventual independence.

These numbers will unlikely change much in the near future, says National Taiwan University political scientist Chen Shih-min. 

“Beijing provides economic benefits to Taiwanese who embrace their reunification overtures, such as for businessmen who have dealings in China, or for some Taiwanese Internet influencers,” he says.

“With Beijing sending planes and ships near Taiwan daily, its military aggression won’t make unification appealing to the public,” he notes.

Support for unification is unlikely to increase also because the majority of Taiwanese associate it with “being swallowed up” by China, he adds.

Among those supporting unification is a faction of the main opposition party Kuomintang (KMT), under the “vague” concept of being a part of a larger Chinese identity, says Dr Chen, adding that it comprises mainly retired soldiers who may be quite influential in the KMT but are a minority.

At the same time, there have been shifts in how Taiwanese identify themselves, according to another National Chengchi University poll. Those who identify solely as Taiwanese make up the biggest group, at 60.8 per cent of the population, compared with 17.6 per cent 31 years ago.

Around 32.9 per cent see themselves as both Taiwanese and Chinese, while only 2.7 per cent view themselves as purely Chinese.

Dr Lu says he has trouble understanding such numbers.

“We grew up on this island called Taiwan, but our blood is still Chinese, isn’t it?” says the native of Taiwan’s Chiayi county.

“China has become a strong economic and world power, and I think we should proudly claim to be a part of that, instead of push it away,” he adds. 

Ask him about Beijing’s increased military aggressions towards Taiwan and he says it is “provoked” by the United States and the DPP government, which has fostered warm relations with Washington. 

“They left Beijing with no choice but to make such moves,” he reasons.

Fears of being cancelled

Dr Lu says he was not always so open about being a pro-unification supporter – going public only in the mid-1990s after going through a lot of “internal struggles”. 

He was afraid that he would be fired from his university teaching posts. “I didn’t lose my jobs, but I felt like my colleagues didn’t want to have anything to do with me any more after that,” says Dr Lu, who began attending pro-unification events and shared his viewpoints in newspaper writings. “They couldn’t accept me.”

The same goes for Mr Chi Chia-lin, chairman of the fringe Reunification Alliance Party. 

The 72-year-old is a regular protester today at pro-independence events, and oversees the publication of the magazine Motherland, which runs articles about China’s meteoric rise, among other things.

But in his “former life”, he had kept his pro-unification views to himself, fearing that he would face discrimination both professionally and socially. 

“I kept my thoughts to myself, even though I disagreed with some of the policies put out at work,” says the former civil servant, who retired in 2005. 

“But now I think it’s my duty to let society know that they could lead better lives if people just embraced China’s rule.” 

Like Dr Lu, Mr Chi is impressed with China’s development on the world stage, and says that Taiwanese should not ignore their shared ethnicity with those living on the mainland. 

Acknowledging that there are “very few” people in the pro-unification camp in Taiwan, he blames the supporters of the ruling party for making it “difficult” for them. 

“Pro-unification groups are always attacked so viciously by the pan-green camp,” he says, referring to the DPP’s party colour. “But that’s why I have to stand up now and make our voices heard.”

‘Political correctness’

Professor Lu Chien-yi, a humanities researcher at Academia Sinica, believes one must be politically correct to be accepted by Taiwanese society – and that cannot mean being pro-Beijing.

Prof Lu says she would know. 

She was one of 37 scholars who released an “anti-war statement” in March, in which they said China’s threats to Taiwan mostly resulted from US provocations. The group called for redirecting the island’s military budget to other fields such as social welfare. 

The reaction to the statement was immediate, with the group being widely criticised online as being “naive” and promoting open surrender to Beijing while ignoring its substantive acts of aggression towards Taiwan. 

They were also condemned for having views which overlapped with pro-unification supporters, even though they did not identify as such, Prof Lu says. 

“We’d just like to point out that the US could sacrifice Taiwan while seeking to maintain its global power status.”

National Chengchi University journalism professor Feng Chien-san, who also signed the statement, believes there should be less disdain for Taiwanese pro-unification voices.

“Unification supporters must see some benefits in pushing their cause. Just like the rest of us, they love Taiwan too,” he says. 

Dr Lu, the retired professor, says: “I know people don’t agree with me, but I want what I think is best for my homeland, Taiwan.” 