LONDON - United States President Joe Biden hailed his country’s relations with Britain as “rock solid” during a stopover in London, on his way to a summit of the Nato military alliance.

“Couldn’t be meeting with a closer friend and a greater ally,” Mr Biden said as he sat down for talks with British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak on Monday.

But although Mr Sunak responded by claiming that the two countries remain “the most steadfast allies”, warm words from both leaders could not hide the differences of opinion between Washington and London, especially concerning the war in Ukraine.

The Biden administration came to office in early 2021, holding a dim view of the British government. Mr Boris Johnson, who was then in charge in London, was regarded in Washington as unreliable and a political lightweight.

And, as a president proud of his Irish ancestry, Mr Biden was appalled by the prospect that Britain’s departure from the European Union could rekindle violence between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland, which remains part of the United Kingdom.

The fact that Britain experienced no fewer than three different prime ministers in 2022 did not help with the country’s reputation in Washington. And during a recent trip to Ireland, President Biden made no effort to hide his negative views of Britain’s role in that nation’s history.

But the war in Ukraine drew the two countries together.

And, as happened so often in the past, the Americans discovered that whatever they may think of the British, they were still less complicated to deal with and far more helpful to the US than almost every other European government.

As a result, the Biden administration invested substantial efforts in cultivating relations with the Sunak government – the two leaders have met five times in as many months in 2023.

Mr Biden remains anxious to dismiss any media speculation about tensions between the two countries.

The American leader did not attend the coronation of Britain’s King Charles III in May, sending instead his wife, Dr Jill Biden, to represent him. That was hardly remarkable; US leaders never attend such ceremonies.

But because the British media still interpreted the absence as a snub, Mr Biden travelled to Windsor Castle outside London for afternoon tea with the British monarch on Monday.

The event was billed as a more substantial talk about new technologies to combat climate change in the presence of important and wealthy financial investors. Yet, there is no question that Mr Biden’s detour to see the King was intended to silence media speculation.

The two countries also signed the so-called Atlantic Declaration in June, a long list of pledges described as “a 21st century US-UK economic partnership” to ensure that their “unique alliance is adapted, reinforced, and reimagined for the challenges of this moment”.

Still, some old tensions remain, and new ones are cropping up.

The British were recently stung by President Biden’s refusal to back the candidature of Mr Ben Wallace, the current British defence secretary, as the next secretary-general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (Nato). The failure to promote a Brit into this key European position reflected poorly on Mr Sunak’s standing.

The British Premier was further put in an awkward position by Mr Biden’s decision to supply cluster munitions to Ukraine.

Unlike the US, Britain is a signatory to a treaty banning these weapons, which scatter a large number of tiny bombs from a rocket or missile while in flight.

So, Mr Sunak had no choice but to disassociate his country from the American move.

His spokesman said: “We stand by our obligations under the convention, which include discouraging (the weapons’) use.”

Mr Biden also caused a stir when, in a media interview on the eve of his trip to London, he clarified that America opposes the idea that war-torn Ukraine should be given an immediate promise of membership in Nato.

He told CNN that there is no agreement to offer Ukraine membership while it is at war with Russia, as this would drag Nato directly into the conflict.

Although the British government maintained its silence on the matter, senior backbenchers from the ruling Conservative Party sharply criticised the American President’s reluctance to admit Ukraine into the military alliance led by the US.

Nonetheless, it is clear that despite varying nuances in Ukraine policy, relations between America’s oldest president and Britain’s youngest prime minister in more than two centuries are doing well.

There are, however, some enduring glitches.

The US summary of Monday’s London talks claimed that the two leaders had “reviewed developments in Northern Ireland”. The British readout of the same talks made no mention of Northern Ireland.

Some differences between the two are still better left unsaid.
