NEW DELHI - Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi faces a no-confidence motion in the Lower House of Parliament next week, brought by a rainbow coalition of 26 opposition parties over ethnic violence in the north-eastern state of Manipur.

While the vote, essentially a test of the government’s strength, will not in any way destabilise Mr Modi’s government – which enjoys a majority in the 545-seat Lower House with 303 MPs – it is an opportunity for the new alliance to build its political credentials in the run-up to the general election in 2024, said analysts.

A debate in the Lower House on Manipur, where ethnic clashes between tribal Kukis and the majority Meitei have resulted in over 100 deaths in the past two months, will take place for three days, ending with a vote on Thursday.

The opposition is also seeking a debate in the Upper House, but both sides are yet to agree on the duration of the debate.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which is in power at the federal level and in the state of Manipur, has been criticised for failing to stop the ethnic violence, with a viral video of an assault on two women who were paraded naked bringing the issue to political centre stage.

Manipur Chief Minister N. Biren Singh, who is a Meitei and BJP leader, has faced accusations of being partisan, with the Supreme Court remarking that there was a “complete breakdown” of law and order in the north-eastern state.

“The optics of the vote of confidence is that it gives an opportunity for the opposition to focus on what it thinks are the shortcomings of the government and put the BJP on the mat. It will show how effective the opposition will be,” said Dr Sandeep Shastri, a political analyst and national coordinator for the Lokniti Network, a research programme.

“More than that, it gives an opportunity for the government to defend itself and hit back at the opposition. In a sense, this is the start of the campaign for the 2024 elections.”

Twenty-six opposition parties on July 18 formalised their alliance and named it INDIA, an acronym that stands for Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance, with the name widely seen to be chosen to challenge the nationalistic plank of the BJP.

The alliance includes political and ideological rivals like the Congress and the Aam Aadmi Party, apart from a clutch of regional parties like the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), which is in power in Tamil Nadu, and Shiv Sena in Maharashtra state. The Congress is a left-of-centre party while the Shiv Sena is a Hindu nationalist party.

The opposition alliance has said its focus will be on issues concerning people, including income inequality and inflation amid a rise in food prices, including vegetables. 

The BJP is going into the elections, much like the elections in 2014 and 2019, banking on the popularity of Mr Modi, apart from issues related to Hindu nationalism and patriotism.

In 2019, the BJP won 303 of the 543 parliamentary seats, up from 282 in 2014, on the back of a high-octane election campaign headed by the Prime Minister and issues like nationalism stoked by an outbreak of hostilities with rival Pakistan that ended with tit-for-tat air strikes.

Analysts noted that the coalition, which has not chosen a leader, faced an uphill task in taking on Mr Modi. 

“On paper, this alliance sounds formidable, but it is actually chaotic. Normally, alliances – including successful ones – are formed on the eve of general elections or shortly after for the purpose of government formation. The problem is to sustain this unwieldy rainbow coalition till next year,” said author and journalist Rasheed Kidwai.

“But so far, so good.”

Still, the Congress, which won 52 seats in 2019, up from 44 in 2014, got a boost on Friday with the Supreme Court suspending a criminal defamation case against its leader Rahul Gandhi, paving the way for his return to Parliament.

Mr Gandhi, whose family has given India three prime ministers, was disqualified from the Lower House of Parliament on March 24, a day after he was found guilty of defamation by a court in the state of Gujarat and given a two-year sentence for a 2019 speech in which he referred to those with the surname Modi as being thieves.

The Supreme Court order also likely paves the way for Mr Gandhi, an MP for nearly two decades since 2004, to participate in the general election next year.

The opposition parties have found common ground in what they say is the use by the ruling party of federal investigating agencies against political opponents, a charge denied by the BJP. 

The formation of the coalition is seen to have caused some consternation in the BJP, which in May lost elections in Karnataka state, in a setback to plans to continue expanding into southern India. The BJP’s base is in northern India. 

The BJP has been busy shoring up its own alliance, the National Democratic Alliance, announcing that 38 parties were part of the coalition.

Dr Shastri noted that the success of the opposition alliance would depend on whether they can keep the focus on issues.

“The big picture is that the BJP would like it to be a leadership fight. They are constantly asking the question about who will be the opposition leader,” he added.

“But how much the opposition can convert the campaign into an issue-based fight is what we need to see.”