JAKARTA – With less than a year left before Indonesia’s next general election, relations between the two most influential leaders in the ruling Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P) have soured, with the choice of a presidential and vice-presidential candidate pairing the main bone of contention.

At the centre of tensions is the selection of a vice-presidential candidate to run with PDI-P’s recently declared presidential candidate Ganjar Pranowo, 54, a senior party member.

The process leading up to party chairman Megawati Soekarnoputri’s announcement of Mr Ganjar’s candidacy had minimally involved incumbent President Joko Widodo, which sources said led him to hold a grudge.

The Indonesian Constitution bars Mr Widodo from seeking re-election as he is now in his second five-year term in office. He has expressed worries about the next president not following through with the reforms he started. Consequently, he has a keen interest in making sure he has influence over his successor. 

“The two figures favoured by Jokowi to be Ganjar’s running mate were cold-shouldered by Megawati,” said a senior PDI-P politician, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Mr Widodo is popularly known as Jokowi.

The two figures are Tourism Minister Sandiaga Uno, 53, who played an instrumental role in helping Mr Widodo’s son-in-law – Mr Bobby Nasution, 31 – win the Medan mayoral election in 2020, and State-owned Enterprise Minister Erick Thohir, 53, whose family was a main donor to Mr Widodo’s presidential campaign in 2019.

According to another politician, this aggravated Mr Widodo, who local media said was caught by surprise by the timing of Mr Ganjar’s nomination as PDI-P’s candidate on April 21.

The politician, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said this could push an unhappy Mr Widodo to instead support rival candidate Prabowo Subianto, whom he appointed as defence minister four years ago.

Mr Prabowo is chairman of the Gerindra party, a member of the ruling coalition led by the PDI-P. 

“Ibu thinks Jokowi is interfering with political parties’ matters. It is not the executive’s matters to handle,” the PDI-P politician told The Straits Times, referring to Ms Megawati with the Bahasa Indonesian word for “madam”.  

Notably, only a few days before Mr Ganjar’s candidacy was announced, Mr Widodo flew to his home town of Solo, Central Java province, to celebrate Hari Raya, which fell on April 22. The announcement, which took place just outside Jakarta, prompted Mr Widodo to fly back to Jakarta on the morning of April 21, before flying back to Solo the same day.

PDI-P secretary-general Hasto Kristiyanto and Mr Ali Mochtar Ngabalin of Indonesia’s Office of Presidential Staff did not reply to a message seeking comments from The Straits Times.

Separately, Mr Widodo also had a discussion with Golkar chairman Airlangga Hartarto on presidential candidates. 

When asked about this, Golkar spokesman Nuruf Arifin told ST: ”There is nothing that we can share.”

Golkar is also a member of the PDI-P-led ruling coalition.

Mr Widodo had earlier faced criticism from his political opponents, who accused him of not maintaining a neutral stance on the 2024 presidential election by making public endorsements of certain presidential hopefuls, breaking the established norm set by his predecessors, who maintained neutrality towards the end of their respective office terms.

Mr Widodo had on separate occasions endorsed Mr Prabowo, saying in a public forum that the 2024 presidential election could be Mr Prabowo’s turn to win.

The outgoing President has also publicly recommended that voters pick a candidate with white hair, in a clear reference to Mr Ganjar.

Mr Prabowo and Mr Ganjar are among the top three candidates, who for more than a year have consistently led Indonesia’s electability survey rankings. The third person, former Jakarta governor Anies Baswedan, is the only opposition presidential candidate in the top three ranks.

Recent surveys have seen Mr Prabowo overtaking Mr Ganjar as the leading candidate, while Mr Anies has remained in third place.

Observers and political foes have also accused Mr Widodo of engaging in acts of “cawe-cawe” in politics, a term that has gained a negative connotation in recent years in Indonesia as it has been widely used to describe rogue government officials engaged in acts of self-enriching, unproductive conduct.   

The origin of “cawe-cawe” is Javanese, and broadly means “to participate in an activity”, according to linguists.

Speaking on the allegations of interference, Mr Widodo told a group of invited local media chiefs at the presidential palace on Monday: “I will not break any regulation, law. Nor will I hurt democracy.”

”Please understand, this is for the national interest. Choosing the right leader in 2024 is very crucial,” Mr Widodo was quoted as saying by Jakarta-based Kompas.tv.

He explained that between now and the next 13 years is a golden period, and that if voters choose a wrong leader, Indonesia would not become an advanced country.

“It’s why I cawe-cawe. I will not be neutral, for the sake of the national interest.”