SHANGHAI – At the Bund, boisterous crowds jostle on a regular Monday night, excitedly snapping and posing for photos along Shanghai’s famed waterfront promenade that gives views of the financial hub’s dazzling skyline.

A year since China’s most open and cosmopolitan city was ordered into a two-month lockdown in April and May in 2022, forcing its 26 million residents to be confined to their homes without food and medicine in the early days, Shanghai appears to have bounced back.

It was a sight unthinkable just a year ago when it was a deserted metropolis with only essential workers such as delivery riders, healthcare staff and grocery shop owners allowed out on the streets.

Now, Shanghai appears to have been revived, following the loosening of municipal pandemic restrictions last June – after more than 60 days in lockdown – and the end of the zero-Covid policy in December 2022.

Passenger flows on subways returned to pre-pandemic levels of 12 million a day as early as February 2023. Malls and tourist attractions, including Shanghai Disneyland, have opened without fear of being ordered to shut – a common occurrence under China’s zero-Covid policy.

But signs have also emerged in the nation’s richest city that its recovery has been slow and soft.

Shanghai’s gross domestic product (GDP) expanded 3 per cent in the first three months of the year, its statistics bureau showed, driven largely by a 13.6 per cent surge in fixed asset investment, which the government used generously during the pandemic to prop up growth.

Even so, it fell behind the official national growth rate of 4.5 per cent for the same period.

In 2019, before the pandemic, Shanghai’s GDP rose 6 per cent, in line with the country’s expansion rate.

Analysts said one major factor for the slower growth is the worsening relationship between China and its biggest rival, the United States. Shanghai has the highest number of foreign residents and global companies in the country that ranks as the world’s second-largest economy.

The city also has the world’s busiest container port – which means that it is more sensitive to worsening geopolitical tensions, added analysts. This can contribute to the difference between Shanghai’s growth and the national expansion rate.

“Covid-19 and global tensions, including the Ukraine-Russia conflict, have affected the international supply chain, transport and logistics. China and the West have been relatively slow in reverting to more open and efficient transportation,” said Associate Professor Daniel Chng at the China Europe International Business School in Shanghai.

A survey by the American Chamber of Commerce in China on Wednesday showed that US companies in China are increasingly pessimistic about the relationship between Washington and Beijing as geopolitical tensions escalate, even as they have a more favourable view of the Asian giant’s recovery.

In the first two months of 2023, Shanghai attracted 641 new foreign investment projects, a drop of 22.4 per cent from a year ago, according to its statistics bureau. In the whole of 2019, the city drew 6,800 of such projects.

The Shanghai chapter of the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China told The Straits Times that the city’s harsh lockdown in 2022 had eroded trust, leaving companies wondering whether similar disruptive policies will be enforced without warning in the future.

“The spillover from heightened geopolitical tensions, particularly the US-China technology war, has contributed to the feeling of uncertainty within the European business community in China. The kind of unpredictability that such events bring is not conducive to long-term investment planning,” it added.

The chapter also said that it is now more difficult to attract foreigners to live and work in the city, despite the reopening of the country’s borders.

“It has also become more difficult to retain foreign talent. The damage done by enforced, weeks-long lockdowns and separation from loved ones is not easily repaired,” the chamber added, referring to how the authorities in Shanghai, to curb outbreaks, separated parents from their young children.

About 25 per cent of Germans living in Shanghai left after the lockdown, while the number of French and Italian citizens registered with their governments each fell by 20 per cent, according to the chapter.

Shanghai has about 164,000 overseas residents, according to an official once-in-a-decade population census whose findings were released in 2021.

A United States citizen, who wanted to be known only as Chris, said he left Shanghai in November 2022 after spending 18 years there, because he opposed the way the authorities had framed the pandemic as one caused by “foreigners”.

Beijing had pointed to Fort Detrick in Maryland in America, where the US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases is located, as the likely origin of Covid-19. Most of the earliest infections were associated with a market in Wuhan, the provincial capital of Hubei in central China.

“I would go onto the bus or the subway, and people would look and step away from me as if I was infected. They would also cover their mouths and noses,” he said.

He declined to give his full name because he did not want to be seen as bad-mouthing the government. The 55-year-old runs a consulting firm in Shanghai that helps US companies enter the Chinese market, and now shuttles between California and Shanghai every few months.

The chapter said: “As world-class research and development ecosystems rely on an abundance of talent from diverse backgrounds, Shanghai’s shrinking foreign labour pool also poses a real threat to its innovation ambitions.”

Mr Bo Zhengyuan, a partner at consulting firm Plenum in Shanghai, said the city’s economic performance in the second quarter will play a big role in determining whether it can hit its growth target for the year, but that more must be done to boost consumption, which has remained relatively low.

Shanghai’s GDP fell by a staggering 13.7 per cent between April and June 2022, due to the severe lockdown.

Shop owners are still waiting for that uptick in spending, which the central government has prioritised to boost this year.

“The crowds are back but we don’t see them spending as much as they used to,” Ms Ye Ting, 38, told ST.

She sells traditional Chinese fans and scented sachets, along with other knick-knacks, in Tianzifang, a popular arts and crafts enclave.

She is banking on the upcoming five-day May Day holiday – the biggest break in China after the Chinese New Year festival in January – to make up for sales that have fallen by about 70 per cent, compared with 2019.

“The sales from the May Day holiday will play a big part in whether I continue with my business or not,” she said.

Despite having the highest disposable income – 23,489 yuan (S$4,530) – in the first quarter of this year among all of China’s provinces and municipalities, Shanghai residents are choosing to be prudent.

Consumption in the first-tier city – a status given to China’s most developed areas – grew by 5.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2023, slightly lower than the national growth rate of 5.8 per cent.

Public relations executive John Yang, 30, for one, has cut back on late nights out.

He has reduced his Friday and Saturday nights spent clubbing to once every other month.

“I spent half of last year under quarantine, and my income and savings were really badly hit. I’m trying to save more, to have at least six months of my salary in savings,” he added.

At Shanghai Disneyland, one of the city’s top tourist draws, crowds have not fully returned, according to visitors.

When asked, a spokesman for the park said it does not disclose attendance figures.

“The wait time for rides is definitely shorter. I remember waiting more than an hour for the Tron Lightcycle Power Run in 2019, but I just waited for less than 30 minutes for my turn earlier,” said Mr Danny Zhou, 36, who came with his wife and four-year-old daughter. “It was a regular weekend on that last visit too.”

The theme park was a severe casualty of China’s strict Covid-19 policy in 2022, shutting three times – the longest spell lasting 101 days between March 21 and June 30.

Thousands of visitors were trapped in the park for reportedly eight hours in October 2022 following a Covid-19 scare that required those inside to be tested and show a negative result before they were allowed to leave.

The park was also closed for two days in November 2021 with more than 30,000 visitors stuck inside, after the authorities ordered everyone to be tested.

Mr Zhou, an investment manager, said: “I’m glad I don’t have to worry about the sudden lockdowns which was why I decided to bring my family here.

“It’s been quite a nice visit so far, because the park feels more spacious, and I don’t feel the need to rush around with my daughter in tow to make sure we get on all the rides we want.”

The Shanghai government has said it is optimistic that the city will post growth of above 5.5 per cent in 2023, buoyed by China’s reopening – higher than the national target of around 5 per cent announced during this year’s parliamentary meetings in March.

It has released a raft of measures – from 100 billion yuan worth of retail vouchers distributed through an electronic lottery in November 2022, to cash awards of up to 100 million yuan to attract manufacturing projects in key sectors such as artificial intelligence and biotechnology – to spur economic growth.