For over a century, the prevailing opinion of most Western governments was that the professions of spying and diplomacy should be kept separate.

Of course, spies and diplomats are recruited and expected to work for the same government. And needless to say, the information they acquire is shared across government departments. Furthermore, there were previous occasions when spies acted as diplomats or carried out what would traditionally be regarded as diplomatic missions.

Still, such occasions were few and far between. For the rule of thumb remained that diplomats worked in public while spooks worked in secret, that each group had its tasks and missions and that the two professions only met – if they ever did – when strictly necessary. Indeed, as late as the 1990s, the British still claimed – ridiculously – that they didn’t have any spying agencies.

Yet over the past two years, the spies keep coming in from the cold to handle delicate missions, which used to be regarded as the prerogative of diplomats.

When US President Joe Biden launched a last-ditch effort to prevent Mr Vladimir Putin, his Russian counterpart, from invading Ukraine, the man he sent to Moscow to talk to Mr Putin was neither the US Secretary of State nor the Defence Secretary, but Mr William Burns, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).

And in May this year, when tensions between China and the United States were at their highest, and Chinese Minister of National Defence Li Shangfu refused to engage in negotiations with Mr Lloyd Austin, his US counterpart, on the margins of the Shangri-La security meet in Singapore, it was again none other than the CIA chief who was dispatched to Beijing to calm tempers.

So, while diplomatic missions by chief spooks were once considered a rarity and only became known years, if not decades, after they had taken place, they are now becoming routine and public, at least as far as the US is concerned. This is a significant development, and one which carries just as many opportunities as risks.

Spies and diplomats: Creative tensions

The separation between intelligence and diplomacy made both practical and political sense. Spying agencies are responsible for all the murky and even dirty work of planting and recruiting agents seeking to obtain information on enemies. It’s a specialised trade. And despite regular claims that human intelligence no longer matters much in the electronic age, working for a good intelligence agency remains a trade that gets increasingly specialised. Therefore, keeping this apart from diplomacy is a matter of good resource management.

It is also a question of proper political accountability. Foreign policy should and is subjected to public scrutiny; elected ministers run it. But spying activities are run by civil servants who are responsible to ministers yet operate in secrecy.

For these reasons, the mission of intelligence is usually to provide information about the activities, intentions, and behaviour of other nations, entities, groups, or individuals so that governments can estimate the strength of allies and the options of adversaries.

The job of spooks is, therefore, not to make policy but to aid in its formulation, to ensure that any government policy is based on the best possible information from the most reliable sources, delivered as fast as possible, ideally in the most digestible and accessible format.

There has always been plenty of creative tension between diplomacy and intelligence.

Spies and diplomats end up working together in the same embassy, and that creates professional differences. Some diplomats fear that secret intelligence activities could, if discovered, inflict grave damage on relations with foreign countries and therefore regard some of the spooks as reckless individuals. And intelligence officers sometimes believe that diplomats may be less than enthusiastic supporters of covert spying activities.

But on the whole, relations between the two trades work well, and both sides are at pains to avoid stepping on each other’s toes. So, when do intelligence agencies take the lead in major diplomatic initiatives?

The Israeli example

Spies can become diplomats when certain countries need to help each other because they share similar security concerns but cannot be seen publicly cooperating or cannot afford to establish full diplomatic relations.

The classic example of this is Israel; no other state in the world uses its intelligence agencies to pursue its diplomatic agenda as much as the Jewish state. The reputation of Israel’s intelligence agencies – not only of its famed Mossad but also of its military intelligence and its various communication interception units – has often been traded as a commodity designed to improve Israel’s foreign policy posture.

From as far back as the late 1950s, Israel secretly cooperated with Turkey, Jordan, the Gulf states, and Iran, then ruled by the Shah, at a time when not one Muslim state was ready to have full diplomatic relations with Israel or be seen to be consorting with leaders of the Jewish state.

Almost all of this relationship consisted of exchanges in intelligence material. And some of it was of crucial importance to Israel’s secret partners. The Jordanian monarchy was repeatedly saved from destruction by timely information provided by the Israelis. And the same happened to Israel’s intelligence partners farther afield in Africa: for instance, Ethiopia’s Emperor Haile Selassie overcame a 1960 coup attempt because of timely information supplied by Israeli spies.

In all such cases, Israel’s intelligence community maintained friendly relations with foreign countries, otherwise the primary job of diplomats.

Another example of spies acting as diplomats occurred when communication channels did exist, but they were not considered appropriate for one reason or another. This was the case with then US President Donald Trump’s 2018 decision to overturn decades of American policy by meeting with North Korea’s leader Kim Jong Un. Because Washington did not initially know how Pyongyang would react to this, the first preliminary contact and most of the preparations for the subsequent summit, which took place in Singapore, were handled by Mr Mike Pompeo, who was then the CIA director.

A similar example of spies becoming diplomats occurred in 2002 when Britain’s Secret Intelligence Service – more commonly known as MI6 – uncovered compelling evidence that Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi had a well-advanced nuclear weapons programme, as well as a stockpile of hundreds of chemical warheads that could be detonated from the air. A year later – primarily by conducting direct negotiations – the MI6 got him to renounce his deadly arsenal.

This was a major foreign and security policy coup. And, arguably, it could not have been achieved by diplomats; it needed someone like Sir Richard Dearlove, the then James Bond-style “C” as the head of MI6 is known, to look at the dictator in the eye and tell him that the Brits knew all about his secret programme and that unless he dismantled it, he’d have it dismantled forcibly, by Western military.

Chief diplomatic fixer

Yet even if one recalls all these historical examples, the current use of CIA director Burns as America’s chief diplomatic fixer is extraordinary, both in frequency and scope.

For the chief of the organisation, which describes itself as “the world’s premier foreign intelligence agency”, was ordered by President Biden to undertake critical diplomatic missions in countries such as Russia and China, where the US has large embassies and plenty of other opportunities for dialogue.

The Biden administration did not need Mr Burns’ intervention because the US lacked diplomatic capacity or because it wanted to keep its messages secret, but because it concluded that only he would succeed in talking to people diplomats won’t be able to see, such as Chinese top internal security officials, or someone like Mr Nikolai Patrushev, the powerful secretary of Russia’s Security Council, arguably that country’s top spy.

Washington also deployed Mr Burns repeatedly because it believed that the words of a CIA boss would ring more accurate than reassurances from a top diplomat. That became evident during the last weekend in June, when the Wagner group of Russian mercenaries mounted an armed rebellion against President Putin. Mr Burns spent an hour on the phone with the Kremlin, reassuring Russia’s spooks that Washington had no hand in that rebellion and no desire to overthrow Mr Putin.

The risks of blurring the lines

While the US administration’s repeated decisions to use Mr Burns in this way may be right, blurring the fundamental distinction between intelligence and diplomacy also entails some significant dangers.

To start with, not every intelligence chief is capable of conducting diplomacy. In the US government model, where the CIA director is a political appointee, the intelligence chief is likely to be someone experienced in public negotiations, not to mention one with a good working relationship with the president. But in most other countries, intelligence chiefs are civil servants who rose through the ranks and may not necessarily have such public skills.

Engaging intelligence chiefs in diplomacy also raises the danger of “cooking” intelligence material to support a foreign policy objective; this is by far the most dangerous professional and political trap which can cripple national policy and ruin the careers of intelligence officers.

Mr Burns is an acknowledged expert on Russia, and there is no evidence that because he is acting as Washington’s top diplomat on Russia, he is also influencing the CIA’s intelligence assessments of Russia.

Still, the danger exists that future intelligence analysts would be reluctant to provide assessments which appear to contradict their boss’ diplomatic engagement in a particular crisis; that is why the involvement of spying agencies in policymaking used to be considered such a bad idea.

And then, there is the question of the concessions spooks are prepared to make when they conduct diplomacy. Since they are much more willing to consider risks and cut legal corners, they may end up promising things diplomats will never consider.

The classic example of this appears to be the 2003 promise of Britain’s intelligence chiefs that they would cooperate with Libya’s Gaddafi in apprehending opponents of the Libyan regime worldwide, provided he gave up his nuclear programme.

The deal seemed like a bargain to Britain’s spies but was a disastrous embarrassment to subsequent British governments.

Technological advances – such as the proliferation of open source material and the availability of artificial intelligence software capable of retrieving data and providing valuable correlations between disparate bits of information – will mean that tomorrow’s intelligence services are bound to operate much more in the public domain.

So, in many respects, chiefs of such organisations will become much more public figures regardless of what their political bosses decide.

But that does not mean that using intelligence chiefs in the execution of public policy is a good idea. Better encourage them to stick to what they do best: provide impartial and accurate analysis without courting TV cameras and chandelier-laden conference rooms.
