NEW DELHI - Singapore is open to the possibility of importing electricity from countries in the region, including India, The Straits Times has learnt from the Energy Market Authority (EMA).

This response comes following a set of questions sent to the authority seeking its comment on a reported move by India and Singapore to try and link their power grids.

According to a July 30 report in The Economic Times, the two countries have “fast-tracked” plans to connect their power grids through an undersea cable via the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal, allowing India to sell renewable energy to Singapore.

An Indian government official, who declined to be identified, told ST that such a move was indeed being looked at, with a team of experts – including those from the Power Grid Corporation of India – expected to visit Singapore later in 2023 to discuss this matter.

The EMA said it “welcomes” proposals from regional countries, including India, to import up to 4 gigawatt (GW) of electricity into Singapore.

It is doing so under a Request for Proposal (RFP) that closes on Dec 29, 2023, and through which the EMA will “select and appoint” companies to import the electricity.

The EMA also told ST in May that it had received more than 20 proposals to import electricity from countries in the region, and that it was confident of meeting its import ambitions.

Proposals for electricity supplied using coal-fired generation technologies are not being accepted under the RFP issued in July 2022.

The cost of exporting renewable electricity from India to Singapore through undersea cables that could stretch over 3,000km is uncertain.

But an unnamed source in The Economic Times report claimed the “landed cost” of such power exported from India to Singapore would be cheaper than Singapore’s gas-based electricity.

The longest undersea power cable currently in operation is the North Sea Link, which involves a 720km subsea connection between Britain and Norway.

The estimated cost of the project was €2 billion (S$2.96 billion), and it became operational in 2021.

Dr Rajendra Prasad Singh, a former chairman and managing director of Power Grid Corporation of India, said that any such initiative between the two countries would require significant financial investment as well as “political willingness”.

However, such transboundary projects, he noted, are not just “doable” but also needed to overcome regional power shortages.

These power shortages may emerge from the supply variability of wind and solar energy, generation of which depends on local weather conditions as well as time of the day.

“Such regional grids within the Asiatic region must be started as early as possible,” Dr Singh added.

Singapore’s proposed low-carbon import of 4GW of electricity is expected to make up around 30 per cent of the nation’s power supply in 2035 and could come from a network of undersea cables spanning several thousands of kilometres.

Such underwater proposals to import electricity into land-starved Singapore include Sun Cable’s Australia-Asia PowerLink that aims to supply up to 15 per cent of the Republic’s power needs.

The A$30 billion (S$26.35 billion) project plans to supply green power to Singapore via a 4,200km cable from Darwin in Australia’s Northern Territory.

According to plans, the undersea cable will pass through Indonesian waters before terminating in Singapore.

In March, the EMA also granted Keppel Energy conditional approval to import 1GW of renewable electricity from Cambodia that will be transmitted to Singapore via new subsea cables of more than 1,000km.

In another deal announced on Aug 7, Vena Energy, a renewable energy company, said it will collaborate with Shell Eastern Trading to supply renewable power generated by the former’s proposed hybrid project in Indonesia’s Riau Islands to Singapore.

As at July, India had a total renewable energy capacity of more than 179GW. The country plans to achieve 500GW of installed electricity capacity from non-fossil fuel sources, including nuclear, by 2030.

In the 2023 financial year, which ended on March 31, India became a net exporter of power, with the world’s third-largest energy consumer exporting electricity to Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan.

It could do so to Sri Lanka as well after the two countries announced a plan in July to establish a high-capacity power grid interconnection between them to enable bi-directional electricity trade between Sri Lanka and other regional countries.

India has also put its weight behind promoting solar energy on a wider global level, with the country co-launching the One Sun One World One Grid (OSOWOG) initiative in November 2021 along with Britain.

An initiative of the International Solar Alliance (ISA), it aims to connect different regional grids to transfer renewable energy power across borders, especially solar energy.

Singapore ratified the framework agreement of the ISA on May 26, becoming one of the 94 countries to have done so.

A statement issued to ST by the ISA said that the alliance is currently evaluating potential interconnections under OSOWOG that have “India at the fulcrum” and seek to connect Gulf Cooperation Council countries in West Asia, as well as those in the Greater Mekong Subregion and Asean.

It added that it expects ongoing bilateral and multilateral discussions to link power grids to set “a framework for regions and countries to understand the feasibility of the interconnections”.

“The ISA, leveraging its unique position as the ‘platform of platforms’ with intergovernmental support, aims to assist in overcoming any political and financial challenges that may arise during the implementation process,” it said.