TAIPEI – “Let’s not just let this go.”

A political campaign worker promises to help her younger colleague seek justice after a groping incident in their office, despite pressure to keep silent about it.

This pivotal scene in the hit 2023 Taiwanese Netflix series Wave Makers has been credited with sparking what is being called the territory’s long overdue MeToo movement.

In recent weeks, since the political drama series’ release in late April, dozens of Taiwanese – the overwhelming majority being women – have come forward to say they have experienced sexual misconduct.

While the allegations began in the political sphere, with multiple accusations directed at members from the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), they have since spread across Taiwanese society, involving professors, cultural figures and doctors, among others.

“When the MeToo movement rocked the United States and other countries years ago, it didn’t have much impact in Taiwan because it might have seemed foreign,” said Professor Echo Luo, a gender studies expert at Taipei’s Shih Hsin University. “But this very localised TV production is set in Taiwan and tells the story of a Taiwanese experience, which was very triggering for people here.” 

Specifically, it has stirred debate about workplace sexual harassment, said Prof Luo. 

“The conversation has gone beyond trying to define what constitutes sexual harassment. We’re now talking about employers and institutions not doing enough to protect victims.” 

It all began on May 31. A former DPP staff member took to Facebook to write about her experience of being sexually harassed in a car after a campaign film shoot, and how the incident was covered up by her then supervisor Hsu Chia-tien.

She alleged that Ms Hsu, who was in charge of the party’s women affairs at the time, questioned her: Why did she not scream while being harassed? Why did she not get out of the car to escape?

“I also thought I could let this go,” the staff member wrote in her social media post, referencing the TV show’s pivotal scene. 

“But recently when I watched the show, I was overwhelmed and cried until I almost died,” she said, noting that she decided to now be brave.

Her essay drew an outpouring of support and was shared thousands of times. Ms Hsu was suspended the next day and later resigned.

Since then, several other high-profile allegations of sexual harassment within the DPP have emerged, prompting the resignation of senior officials including Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen’s adviser Yen Chih-fa, who denied accusations of sexual harassment that a campaigner levelled against him.

Before long, victims made allegations of sexual misconduct against members of the opposition Kuomintang, and then against notable figures in other parts of society. Those accused include Mr Wang Dan, former student leader of China’s 1989 Tiananmen Square protests; Polish diplomat Bartosz Rys; and Chinese poet Bei Ling.

A Facebook post compiling the allegations has recorded more than 80 cases so far. Most of the alleged perpetrators have denied the accusations.

Ms Tsai has twice apologised over the allegations involving her party, while promising a series of reforms in Taiwan, including reviewing current sexual harassment reporting mechanisms and ensuring that an external system is in place to help victims should their employers fail to properly handle complaints.

“Our society as a whole must educate ourselves again,” she said in a Facebook post on June 6. “The people who have been sexually harassed are victims, not wrongdoers. These are people we must protect, not treat with prejudice.”

Several activists whom The Straits Times spoke to say that they certainly hope the momentum of the movement will lead to systemic changes.

“Taiwan is known to be a very progressive society, but there’s still a lot more that can be achieved,” said Ms Christina Chen, director of Awakening Foundation, which promotes gender equality. 

Women account for 42 per cent of Taiwan’s Parliament, far higher than the global average of 29 per cent, according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union, an international organisation of national Parliaments.

In 2019, the island also became the first place in Asia to legalise same-sex marriage, in a major win for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer community.

Still, workplace sexual harassment remains a problem, with many victims – in particular women – afraid to report the incidents amid a culture of victim-blaming, said Ms Chen.

“When women get attacked, it’s natural for some of them not to fight back or cry out, because they don’t know how to react at that moment,” she said. 

“But others will criticise them for not doing anything, which further fosters a culture of silence because they fear people won’t believe them.”

According to a survey by the Ministry of Labour, around 200,000 people faced sexual harassment at the workplace in 2022, with 140,000 of them being women. However, only 30,000 women and 9,500 men filed complaints to their bosses, due to fears that they would be ignored or that their case would be treated as a joke.

Ms Chen added that there are loopholes in Taiwan’s laws that need to be addressed. 

For example, current regulations place the responsibility for investigations into workplace sexual harassment cases on the employer, which is problematic if the employer also happens to be the perpetrator.

“Sometimes, the perpetrator could also be someone who’s very powerful and very friendly with the employer. In those instances, the victim is unlikely to be protected,” Ms Chen noted.

There is also a need for more education and awareness campaigns at all workplaces about gender equality and sexual harassment, she said. 

The “wonderful” thing is that she has already received several requests from various groups to help establish sexual harassment policies and reporting mechanisms in their offices.  

It is the same with Prof Luo, the gender equality expert, who said she has been consulted for advice on the issue in the past two weeks, by both public and private organisations.

“This MeToo movement represents a big turning point for Taiwan. We must not let this opportunity go to waste,” she said. 