TAIPEI – For the first time, the founder of the world’s largest semiconductor manufacturer has openly expressed his support for the move by the United States to slow China’s chip development.

“I have no quarrel with that. In fact, I might say I support it,” said Mr Morris Chang, the retired founder of Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, or TSMC, while discussing Washington’s chip restrictions on China.

Although he did not elaborate, the 91-year-old, who remains an influential figure in the industry, expressed his backing for the US’ China policy multiple times at an event hosted by Taiwan’s CommonWealth Magazine in Taipei on Thursday. 

“There’s no question in my mind that, in the chip sector, globalisation is dead,” he said.

“Just look at the way China has been embargoed and the entity list... and I agree with that,” he said, referring to Washington’s slew of export curbs designed to choke off Beijing’s access to chips and ultimately block its tech ambitions.

Semiconductors, or chips, are the critical components used to power everything from smartphones to refrigerators to cars.

Taiwan produces 65 per cent of the world’s semiconductors and almost 90 per cent of the most advanced chips, with TSMC being the world’s largest contract chipmaker.

China accounts for about 10 per cent to 12 per cent of TSMC’s revenue, but the US is the company’s largest customer base, accounting for more than 65 per cent, or NT$1.49 trillion (S$65.7 billion), of its total sales in 2022.

But Mr Chang warned that as the global chip supply chain becomes more bifurcated – where one pipeline is for China and the other for the rest of the world – problems will crop up.

First, prices will increase.

“And when the costs go up, the pervasiveness of chips will either stop or slow down considerably,” he said. “We are going to be in a different game.”

At that point, Mr Chang took the opportunity to tease Mr Chris Miller, author of the best-selling 2022 book Chip War, who was seated beside him on stage. 

“The reason Chris started to write his book was because he realised chips were so pervasive.

“But now that he has finished writing the book, the game has changed,” he said, drawing laughter from the audience. 

Mr Miller’s book tracks the origins of the chip industry and the decades-long battle by different countries to stay ahead in the game since then.

The American historian agreed that the semiconductor supply chain is set to be more bifurcated – especially for the most cutting-edge technology, he said.

This is due not just to growing restrictions on China’s access to chips from the US, but also Japan and the Netherlands. 

“I think that any country that strives for self-sufficiency is likely to find itself spending a lot of money and getting less good technology as a result,” Mr Miller said, noting that there are multiple critical territories involved in the sector.

Meanwhile, even as the Chinese government is investing billions into bolstering its chip sector, Mr Chang noted that China’s chip manufacturing technology lags behind Taiwan’s by at least half a decade.

“They are now making their most advanced chip with difficulty. TSMC was making that chip five to six years ago with ease,” he said.

Although TSMC is a clear leader in semiconductor manufacturing, there have been worries among some observers that the company’s continued expansion beyond Taiwan’s shores will weaken what many call its “silicon shield” amid increased aggression from Beijing, which views the island as a breakaway province to be reunified with.

The “silicon shield” is the idea that Taiwan’s unrivalled strength in producing semiconductor chips can protect it against a Chinese attack.

In late 2022, TSMC began construction of a second chip factory in the US state of Arizona that is set to use cutting-edge three-nanometre technology.

But Taiwanese Vice-President William Lai, who earlier gave a speech at the event, stressed the government’s commitment to working with the company and retaining the most advanced processes on the island.

“We are very determined TSMC shall stay where it was born and raised,” he said, noting how a “small chip can drive changes in geopolitics”.

“China should understand that if it initiated a war, Taiwan will not be the only one to be hurt. Instead, it would be devastating to the entire world.”