After days without a leader, the military junta which seized power in Niger last week by effectively kidnapping President Mohamed Bazoum now has a face.

The man who claims to be the ruler of the landlocked African country with a population of 25 million and a territory double that of France, its old colonial power, is General Abdourahmane Tchiani, who has headed Niger’s presidential guard since 2015.

Dressed in battle fatigues with decorations and medal bars and a beret from his crack military unit on his head, Gen Tchiani appeared on national television to justify his putsch against the country’s elected leader. He said he was “motivated by the sole desire to preserve” Niger from “the continuous deterioration of the security situation”. But as the long history of coups throughout Africa indicates, just about the last thing such military takeovers achieve is an improvement in the security or well-being of any nation.

The putsch may yet peter out. Leaders from Ecowas, the bloc of West African nations neighbouring Niger, claim to have “zero tolerance” for coups and have vowed to “take all measures necessary to restore constitutional order”, which “may include the use of force” if Niger’s military doesn’t hand back power to the civilian President by the end of this week. There are also indications that Gen Tchiani is contested by other senior officers within the junta.

What is clear, however, is that the Niger power grab, which follows recent army takeovers in Mali and Burkina Faso as well as previous coups in Guinea and Chad, has created turmoil throughout the so-called Sahel region, a vast swathe of land stretching from the Atlantic Ocean in the west to the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean in the east.

The entire region is now perfect territory for various terrorist groups as well as organised crime and illegal migration networks. And to make matters even worse, the Sahel is now a pawn in a growing confrontation between Russia and the West. It’s hard to imagine a more catastrophic mix of circumstances. And it is harder still to predict a positive outcome to the region’s disasters; we are probably looking at decades of continued strife.

The violence is also a matter of concern to China, which has extensive economic interests in the Sahel, including in Niger, where it has stakes in the mining and energy sectors.

Though rich in various minerals, the Sahel’s inhabitants are destitute. The United Nations Human Development Index – an aggregate of indicators including life expectancy, literacy rate, rural populations’ access to electricity, gross domestic product per capita, exports and imports, income inequality and much more – places all the Sahel countries at the bottom.

Dangers from an ‘ungoverned space’

The region has porous borders, crossed at will by merchants and traffickers of drugs and arms. It is deeply affected by climate change, which is responsible for a spike in the incidences of drought, flooding and soil erosion. A demographic explosion is also looming: The biggest Sahelian countries of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and Niger are home to around 80 million people but are expected to reach 200 million inhabitants by the middle of this century.

Immediately after the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States in 2001, most governments identified the Sahel region as a critical security threat; preventing it from becoming an “ungoverned space” – as US officials put it at that time – was a key objective.

Soon after invading Afghanistan to hunt down the leaders of Al-Qaeda, the US launched the Pan-Sahel Initiative. This was followed in 2005 by the so-called Trans-Saharan Counterterrorism Partnership, which concentrated more specifically on eradicating terrorist organisations.

The Europeans, meanwhile, launched their initiatives. Most notably, France set up a broader security architecture for the region, including Mali, Mauritania, Burkina Faso, Chad and Niger, known as the G5 Sahel.

And France took the lead in repeatedly deploying troops to uphold some order. The so-called Operation Serval, engaging 5,200 soldiers under French leadership, was launched in early 2013 to prevent Mali from being overwhelmed by Islamic militants.

Then in 2014, came Operation Barkhane, another French-led anti-terrorism initiative throughout the Sahel region, which at its peak involved 5,500 soldiers, included all the G5 Sahel states, and cost an average of €1 billion (S$1.47 billion) a year. The US military provided intelligence and logistical support to all these operations, including the crucially important airlift capacity.

But in May 2021, French President Emmanuel Macron used a coup d’etat in Mali as a justification to end an operation which was no longer working as intended. Mr Macron initially claimed that French forces would remain in the region as part of a larger international mission; most were withdrawn to Niger.

Mr Bazoum, Niger’s popularly elected civilian President, had doubled down on Niger’s policy of allowing the Western military to operate inside his country. France has a large base in Niamey, the capital, and the US maintains two drone bases, one near the desert city of Agadez, and 1,100 soldiers in the country. But the latest coup in Niger puts all this in doubt.

Terrorism hot spot

Meanwhile, the rest of the region is sliding into further violence. Last year was the deadliest for both Burkina Faso and Mali in more than a decade, with militant groups such as the Islamic State Sahel Province and the Al Qaeda-affiliated Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam in the forefront. According to the Global Terrorism Index, up to half of all the terrorism deaths recorded worldwide now occur in the Sahel.

The Sahel generates large numbers of refugees heading to Europe and acts as the conduit for migrants from other parts of Africa. Because practically all this human traffic is controlled by specialised gangs, the process has created its vicious circle of criminality and violence. As the Europeans know only too well, what festers in Africa does not stay in Africa.

How were so many well-meaning efforts to stabilise the region rewarded with such a spectacular and uniform failure? As is often the case, because of a mixture of bad luck and destructive policies.

The political and social tremors in North Africa provided the bad luck, particularly with the collapse of Libya after the 2011 overthrow and assassination of Muammar Gaddafi, the country’s long-serving ruler.

The subsequent Libyan civil war not only unleashed a vast quantity of weapons which found their way into the hands of gangs in neighbouring states but also rekindled the long-smouldering question of the Tuaregs, a Saharan ethnic group which, primarily due to the machinations of the French colonial administration during the 1950s, were deprived of their state. Tuareg separatist movements are often the drivers of most secessionist movements in the Sahel, the starting point for many Muslim militant groups.

And because stability has still not returned to Libya, the French troops who tried to stamp out the various groups of militants in the Sahel quickly found themselves locked into a sinister game of whack-a-mole: the harder they fought, the more militants and weapons they had to contend with. The return from Libya to northern Mali of heavily armed Tuaregs, who had served as an ancillary force in Gaddafi’s military, provided a constant aggravation.

And then, there were the errors committed by Western governments. Chief among them was the idea that providing security without creating economic stability was possible. To their credit, both the French government and many other Western countries invested heavily in local financial aid programmes. But as is invariably the case on such occasions, the aid was never enough, given the magnitude of the region’s problems, and while the fight against terrorist organisations required immediate attention, the fight against poverty was measured in decades.

The Wagner Group

Yet the most ominous recent development is the arrival of the Russians in the region, in the shape of the Wagner Group of mercenaries. Russia is, of course, no stranger to Africa; at the height of the Cold War, the Soviet Union invested heavily in proxy regional wars against Western interests. Those days are unlikely to return partly because Russia lacks the resources of the old Soviet Union and partly because the confrontation between Russia and the West is now more selective.

But it is vicious. The Wagner Group was created by Russian President Vladimir Putin and led by businessman Yevgeny Prigozhin to challenge Western interests worldwide at the lowest possible cost to Russia while providing Mr Putin with complete deniability of any responsibility.

The strategy worked well. Wagner’s mercenaries were instrumental in the humiliating retreat of the French from the Sahel, an operation Wagner financed by getting its hands on regional raw materials. Mali – where Wagner’s gangs prop up the current military rulers – is Africa’s third-largest exporter of gold.

Wagner acts as an amplifier of the region’s troubles. It encourages further corruption: Wagner runs a sophisticated money laundering and raw materials smuggling operation based in the Central African Republic but spreading through the Sahel. Wagner also enables bad governance: it will prop up any local dictator willing to pay. And all this feeds into further growth for Muslim militant movements, which, as Russia knows only too well, primarily hurts the West.

Mr Prigozhin, Wagner’s boss, may face trouble in Russia for his recent attempted military rebellion against President Putin. But when it comes to Africa, Mr Prigozhin retains a free hand.

Unsurprisingly, Mr Prigozhin welcomed last week’s coup in Niger, which he characterised as “a battle by the people of Niger against their (French) colonisers”, and promptly offered Niger’s new military leaders the services of his mercenary group.

Meanwhile, Mr Putin hosted in Russia last week a summit with African leaders, designed to show that, far from being isolated on the global stage due to its invasion of Ukraine, Russia has many friends, particularly in Africa. Mr Putin also offered African states free Russian cereals to alleviate current food shortages, conveniently glossing over the fact that it is Russia’s refusal to allow Ukraine grain exports which is now contributing to the food crisis.

Either way, the future looks grim. From Mali in the West to Sudan in the East, the Sahel belt is now run by military leaders who are incompetent at managing local economies. Almost a quarter of a century of Western efforts to stabilise the region have now come to nought.

And outside the French Embassy in the Niger capital of Niamey, demonstrators miraculously managed to get hold of plenty of Russian flags. No prizes for guessing who supplied them.
