TAIPEI – The hospitality extended by US House Speaker Kevin McCarthy and other congressional leaders was “warm like the Californian sunshine”, Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen said as she reiterated the importance of Washington’s backing of Taipei this week.

“Their presence and unwavering support reassure the people of Taiwan that we are not isolated, and we are not alone,” she said in a speech at the historic meeting outside Los Angeles, nearing the end of a 10-day foreign trip which has seen her visit the United States twice.

But on the other side of the world, her predecessor Ma Ying-jeou was travelling through China at the same time on a landmark sojourn of his own – and pushing a strikingly different agenda.

In the first-ever trip there by a former or sitting Taiwanese leader, the 72-year-old promoted the historic and cultural ties, stressing that “people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait are Chinese people”.

He met officials such as China’s Taiwan Affairs Office director Song Tao and Shanghai Communist Party secretary Chen Jining.

On paper, both trips were described as “private” and “unofficial” to downplay political undertones.

Ms Tsai was making so-called “transit” stopovers in the US to and from her visits to Guatemala and Belize – two of Taipei’s few remaining diplomatic allies – while Mr Ma was paying respect to his ancestors and fostering student exchanges. 

But the parallel visits reflect the opposing approaches by the island’s two main political parties on how they deal with Washington and Beijing amid heightened cross-strait tensions and worsening US-China ties, which will have implications on Taiwan’s presidential election in January 2024 – and its future.

“The significance of the trips is that it presents the people of Taiwan with concrete examples of two distinct strategies for maintaining Taiwan’s security,” said Assistant Professor James Lee from Academia Sinica in Taipei. 

One strategy, represented by Ms Tsai and her Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), seeks to fortify Taiwan by developing closer relations with the US and “anchoring Taiwan as a member of the rules-based international order”, he noted. 

The other one, represented by Mr Ma and, more broadly, the opposition Kuomintang (KMT), aims to avert war through engagement with both Washington and Beijing.

The question is, which approach will appeal more to the general voter in a time when both cross-strait and US-China ties have deteriorated to their worst in years, leaving Taiwan caught in the middle. 

Beijing claims sovereignty over Taiwan and has vowed to reunify with the island, by force if necessary.

In recent years, it has ramped up military, economic and diplomatic coercions towards Taiwan in attempts to isolate it internationally.

Increased Chinese aggression has traditionally benefited the DPP, which is widely viewed as the party that can stand up to Beijing and defend Taiwan.

That is especially when compared with the Beijing-friendly KMT, with the ruling DPP making accusations that it could “sell out” the island to China.

But aligning too closely with the US could also be counterproductive, noted analysts, particularly when such moves push China to respond with ever-more military pressures towards Taiwan. 

When former US House speaker Nancy Pelosi visited the island in August 2022, China staged massive war games, including simulated sea and air attacks in the skies and waters around Taiwan.

According to the Washington-based Brookings Institution, which conducted surveys in Taiwan following her trip, a majority of respondents believed that Mrs Pelosi’s visit made Taiwan less secure.

On Saturday, a day after Ms Tsai returned from her US trip, China announced that it had begun three days of military exercises around the island “as planned”.

Dr Chen Fang-yu, a political scientist at Taiwan’s Soochow University, noted that Ms Tsai and the DPP have received plenty of positive international press for their consistent messaging about Taiwan’s need to protect its shared democratic values with like-minded partners. 

“But to some Taiwanese, concepts like sovereignty and democracy are more abstract than the fear of war breaking out,” he said, adding that opponents will likely capitalise on such concerns.

Indeed, Mr Ma said on Friday that tension with China has escalated under the current administration and that the island’s future “is a choice between peace and war”. 

But his attempts to present himself as a peacemaker during his trip may not be entirely convincing to many voters either, analysts said. 

While Mr Ma demonstrated his ability to bring Chinese officials to the table, the moves came with “too many preconditions”, according to Professor Chen Shih-min, a Chinese foreign policy expert at National Taiwan University.

“Mr Ma said a lot of things that made China happy, from reiterating the 1992 Consensus multiple times to describing the Taiwanese as members of a large Chinese family. But most Taiwanese would not accept that,” he said.

The 1992 Consensus is a tacit agreement that both sides of the Taiwan Strait are part of one China, though what that means has been subject to different interpretations.

According to the latest data in a long-running survey by Taipei’s National Chengchi University, 60.8 per cent of respondents identify themselves as Taiwanese, while only 2.7 per cent see themselves as solely Chinese.

Another 32.9 per cent define themselves as both Taiwanese and Chinese. 

The few times Mr Ma mentioned the Republic of China – Taiwan’s official name, which is not recognised by Beijing – was in front of students, and not among government officials, Dr Chen said.

Taiwanese media outlets also reported that such mentions were quickly censored by Chinese state media.

Dr Tao Yi-feng, another political scientist at National Taiwan University, said: “Beijing didn’t give him that much room to speak up for Taiwan. Based on his trip, it would be difficult for the median Taiwanese voter to feel assured that he really protected their interests.”

Mr Ma’s presidency from 2008 to 2016 is associated with bringing Taipei and Beijing to their closest relationship ever, though his legacy was blighted by massive protests against a cross-strait trade pact, which was perceived to hurt Taiwan’s economy and leave it vulnerable to political pressure from Beijing.

Going forward, the KMT will have to decide whether it will play up Mr Ma’s trip or ignore it altogether in its presidential election campaign, analysts said. 

As Dr Chen pointed out, neither KMT chairman Eric Chu nor New Taipei mayor Hou Yu-ih, considered the two front runners to be the party’s candidate, have given their views on the trip. 

The DPP, on the other hand, is expected to announce Taiwan Vice-President William Lai as its presidential candidate next week. He will most likely continue the foreign policy of Ms Tsai, who is unable to contest owing to term limits.

Dr Tao said: “Ms Tsai was treated with respect in the US, and she was also low-key and pragmatic, and not overly provocative of Beijing. There’s no reason why Mr Lai would not try to follow in her footsteps.” 

Mr McCarthy initially expressed a desire to visit Taiwan like his predecessor, but Ms Tsai persuaded him to meet in the US due to security concerns, according to the Financial Times.

While he has not ruled out such a visit, his meeting with Ms Tsai in California was widely viewed as the middle ground to avoid inflaming tensions with Beijing.

Ultimately though, Taiwanese voters will be swayed by what the rival superpowers do in the months to come – for example, if Washington’s hard line towards China over the island pushes Beijing to further military aggression. 

“Honestly, there is very little that we can do in Taiwan,” Dr Tao said. “Taiwan will try to be rational and not provoke, and keep trying to engage with different sides but, in the end, it depends on what the US and China do.” 