SINGAPORE - Increased polarisation of the global economy over Russia's war in Ukraine could portend the emergence of distinct geopolitical blocs, with decades-old supply chains, trade ties and cross-border payment systems severed permanently in a so-called "fragmentation" of the global economy, experts have warned.

"Since the early 1980s, for nearly four decades, the world leaders seemed determined to integrate the global economic system. Now they are equally resolute in fragmenting it, though they won't characterise it as such," said Dr Deepak Mishra, director and chief executive of the Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations.

He indicated that one had to only "connect the dots" to see that fragmentation is already under way.

He cited the US-China trade war; the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership without the US and the Indo-Pacific Economic Forum without China; the Belt and Road Initiative by China, to be rivalled by the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment by the Group of Seven (G-7) nations; and the cutting off of Russia from the Swift global banking system as examples of such fragmentation.

"Many of these events predate Russia's invasion of Ukraine, though the latter, along with the policies to restrict cross-border mobility during the Covid-19 pandemic, seems to have exacerbated the situation. It is not easy to predict whether the fragmentation will intensify or weaken over the coming years," he added.

Mr Daniel Leigh, World Economic Studies chief at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), said that at present, there is a lot of uncertainty about what the realignments may look like in case of fragmentation, even though the impact of the Ukraine war on commodities has been immediate.

"Such a tectonic shift would entail high adjustment costs and long-run efficiency losses as supply chains and production networks are reconfigured," he said, referring to moves by firms to shift their suppliers and production to less risky countries in case the rules of the global economy are changed.

"It also represents a major challenge to the rules-based framework that has governed international and economic relations for the last 70 years," he added.

World Bank lead economist Michele Ruta said the war's implications for global trade and investment will largely depend on how governments respond to the changing geopolitical environment.

"The risk of a fragmented world trade and investment system has suddenly increased, and with it a reversal of globalisation, which has been the engine of economic growth and development in the last 30 years," he said.

One element of fragmentation that could be painful for global innovation and economic growth is a divergence of technology standards, Dr Ruta said, pointing to a need for economies of scale, knowledge-sharing and competition to foster innovation.

Mr Leigh said IMF research has shown that technological decoupling could lead to "losses in the order of 5 per cent of gross domestic product for many countries".

But Mr Nandan Unnikrishnan of the Observer Research Foundation is sceptical of the global economy breaking up.

"I don't think we're going to see that happening," he said.

China, for example, will not want to "rock the boat significantly".

"But... it does not mean they're going to miss opportunities to help their economy... if they can buy Russian crude at a discount at a time when crude prices are at record highs, there is no reason why they won't do it."