LONDON – France is experiencing its most serious wave of street rioting in decades as large numbers of mainly young men rampage through the country’s main cities, looting shops in protest against the police killing of a teenager in a suburb of Paris, the capital, on Tuesday.

An average of 45,000 police officers are deployed each night, backed by light armoured vehicles and special crack police units, to quell the violence, which has already resulted in the death of another man, who fell from a supermarket roof during an apparent burglary attempt.

But although French police – now arresting around 1,000 people daily – claim that looting appears to have subsided at the weekend, the situation remains highly flammable because the riots are a direct consequence of France’s grim racial and social problems that have remained untreated for almost half a century.

And the shocking scenes on France’s streets are guaranteed to worsen President Emmanuel Macron’s predicament; he is facing both falling personal popularity ratings and a deeply fractured political scene.

Violence erupted after the death of 17-year-old Nahel M, who was shot at point-blank range by a police officer after his car was pulled over for suspected traffic offences in Nanterre, on the outskirts of Paris.

Police initially claimed it had to open fire because Nahel tried to speed away, endangering officers. But the fatal shooting was filmed and the video clip, which quickly went viral, contradicted claims that police acted in self-defence.

Nahel’s brief life is typical of the fate of many youth descended from migrants from France’s old colonies in North Africa who are still on the margins of society and at risk of becoming the nation’s “lost generation”.

Of Algerian background, Nahel was brought up by a single mother, never knew his father and left school – where his attendance was described as “chaotic” – with no qualifications.

When police stopped him, he was in a Mercedes-Benz car bearing number plates from Poland; he was too young to have a driving licence.

In short, although some details surrounding the tragedy remain murky, this appears to be a classic case of a broken family, leading to social exclusion and criminality, the fate of many second-generation youth from migrant families.

Matters are made worse by the approach taken by French police to tackle this criminality. Instead of increasing their presence in the community to persuade residents of deprived areas that the forces of law and order are on their side, the French response has been to militarise the police.

A law adopted in 2017 in response to previous bouts of race-related violence gave French police extended powers to open fire on suspects fleeing a crime scene or threatening police officers. As a result, incidents of police firings on moving vehicles soared by 40 per cent, and the number of fatal shootings rose even faster, from a yearly average of four to 12 deaths last year.

In many migrant communities, the police are now regarded as the enemy.

The recent riots followed an established pattern, with attacks on police officers first, followed by the torching of buildings representing the state – including schools and libraries.

This progressed to general looting, with particular emphasis on break-ins into shops favoured by the youth, such as those selling sports gear or electronics.

The breeding ground for all these activities is provided by France’s so-called “banlieues”, the dreary, filthy and often crumbling social housing estates on the peripheries of cities where most of the low-income families of former migrants live.

Unemployment among the 5.5 million inhabitants of these slums is around 18 per cent, twice as high as among the youth in the rest of France’s cities.

Transport connections are poor, and there is a lack of social facilities, cinemas, cafes and clubs, so there is hardly anything for the young to do apart from belonging to gangs, peddling drugs and engaging in crime.

The French banlieues go up in flames with depressing regularity, and every time, politicians plan to mobilise resources to clear up these hotbeds of crime, only to forget their pledges soon after.

True to form, therefore, politicians in Paris spent most of the week scoring off points at the expense of each other rather than offering a constructive long-term approach.

The biggest political winner from these tragic events is the National Rally. This far-right, anti-immigrant party is already the third-largest political formation in the French Parliament.

On Thursday, Mr Jordan Bardella, the party’s leader, went to a police station destroyed by rioters to proclaim that the current violence represents “the result of 40 years of crazy immigration policy”. Rightly or wrongly, his message resonates with voters.

And the biggest loser is undoubtedly President Macron, who, despite his frequent public appearances and genuine efforts to engage with the electorate, never seems to hit the right tone.

Mr Macron was abroad when the violence started earlier this week. And although he swiftly returned home to take charge of the situation, the President decided to spend the night of the worst violence attending a live concert by British singer Elton John.

Not the most reassuring of political gestures.