BEIJING – Taiwan’s former president Ma Ying-jeou will make history when he sets foot in China this week – a trip that is as much about the past as it is about the future of the self-ruled democratic island that Beijing claims as its own.

Mr Ma will fly to Shanghai on March 27 for a 12-day visit amid simmering tensions, but he will not travel to Beijing, ostensibly to prevent pro-independence nationalists from politicising his trip.

No incumbent or former Taiwan president has visited China since 1949, when communist forces won the Chinese civil war on the mainland and drove defeated Kuomintang (KMT) troops to the island.

Singapore hosted in 2015 a landmark meeting between Mr Ma, then Taiwan’s outgoing president, and Chinese President Xi Jinping – the highest-level summit between the former civil war rivals, albeit quasi-official, with the two men addressing each other as “Mr” instead of their respective official titles.

Beijing and Taipei do not recognise each other.

Asked if Mr Ma will meet Mr Xi again this time, his spokesman said: “As guests, we are at our hosts’ disposal.”

Nominally, Mr Ma’s trip will be to pay respects to his ancestors in the southern Chinese province of Hunan ahead of the Tomb Sweeping Festival, which is observed in both Taiwan and China.

The real but unsaid purpose is to help the KMT, Taiwan’s main opposition party, regain the presidency in the January 2024 election.

“That the trip is possible amid rising tensions will rekindle memories of his (eight-year) rule when there was peace between the two sides, the (Taiwanese) economy was booming and Taiwan’s streets were inundated with mainland tourists,” said Taiwanese businessman Colin Wang, who owns a bakery and a coffee shop in Beijing and other businesses in Taiwan.

During Mr Ma’s watch, bilateral trade, investment, tourism and civilian exchanges flourished, with many Western media painting him as pro-China or China-friendly even though he declared “no reunification, no independence and no war”.

Said Mr Wang: “Since Russia invaded Ukraine, the spectre of war between Taiwan and the mainland is now real.”

The tacit message for Taiwanese voters: If the KMT wins, there will be peace again. If a pro-independence candidate is elected, there could be war.

Tensions have been simmering since China menaced Taiwan with war games and missile tests in the wake of then United States House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s visit to the island in August 2022 despite China’s protest.

Washington switched diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing in 1979 under a “one China” policy, but remains the island’s biggest arms supplier and champion.

China has sought to push Taiwan into diplomatic isolation, and has refused to deal with incumbent Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen for rejecting Beijing’s reunification overtures.

She insists that Taiwan, which still styles itself as the Republic of China (ROC), is an independent sovereign state that has never been ruled by the People’s Republic of China for a single day.

“The trip will be a boon to the KMT in the presidential election,” said Taiwanese political commentator Edward Wu.

“No one wants war. The KMT is capable of fostering peace, but not the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP),” he said, referring to Ms Tsai’s independence-leaning party.

At age 72, the Harvard-educated Mr Ma is unlikely to run again in 2024 and will call for peace during his trip. But he will tiptoe around the sensitive issue of reunification, which has increasingly lost traction in Taiwan.

Most Taiwanese prefer to maintain the political status quo.

At the very least, Mr Ma is likely to meet China’s point man on Taiwan, Mr Song Tao, and the mayors of the five cities he will visit.

In February, KMT vice-chairman Andrew Hsia visited China and met Mr Song as well as Mr Wang Huning, ranked fourth in the Communist Party of China’s Politburo Standing Committee and chairman of the advisory body to Parliament.

Mr Ma’s trip will also be about the past, underscoring Taiwan’s historic links with China.

He will visit Wuhan, where a KMT-backed armed rebellion in 1911 marked the beginning of the end of China’s last dynasty, the Qing, and led to the founding of the ROC in 1912.

Mr Ma will also make stops in Nanjing, formerly known as Nanking, which served as the capital of the ROC – which ruled most of China before its relocation to Taiwan – as well as Chongqing, formerly known as Chungking, which was China’s wartime capital during World War II.

He will also speak to students at Fudan University in Shanghai.

The tour will end on April 7 and has the blessings of Ms Tsai’s administration this time.

But the DPP called out Mr Ma for sending the wrong message at a time when Mr Xi was visiting Russia and as China continues to intimidate Taiwan. “Can’t Ma Ying-jeou see China’s true nature?” the DPP asked in a statement.

Mr Ma could steal the thunder from Ms Tsai, who plans to meet US House Speaker Kevin McCarthy during a stopover in California in late March or early April while en route to South America. But she has no plans to visit Washington to avoid further provoking China. If she meets US State Department and other administration officials, it would surely rile China, which risks alienating Taiwanese voters if it overreacts.

China asserts that it is still committed to peaceful reunification with Taiwan, but the triangular relationship between China, Taiwan and the US has begun to spiral downwards dangerously.

Mr Ma’s sojourn will target swing voters, who account for about 20 to 25 per cent of the island’s 19 million voters, as it would be next to impossible to sway die-hard pro-DPP or pro-KMT voters.

But whether the KMT will be able to regain the presidency hinges on many variables, including whether it is able to field a single joint ticket to avoid splitting the vote and forge alliances with other moderate politicians, including billionaire Terry Gou, whose Foxconn is the world’s largest maker of iPhones, and former Taipei mayor Ko Wen-je.