LONDON - Western governments are evacuating their citizens from Niger as tensions rise a week after a military coup deposed the African country’s elected president.

President Mohamed Bazoum is still under arrest by the soldiers answerable to General Abdourahamane Tiani, the former head of the presidential guard and leader of Niger’s newly formed military junta.

However, Niger’s neighbours have refused to accept the coup and are threatening a military intervention if the junta does not relinquish power by the end of the week.

Nor is the showdown just a regional affair, for the Niger coup has serious global security implications.

The so-called Sahel, a belt of states stretching from Sudan on the Indian Ocean coastline in the east through Chad, Niger, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Mauritania on the Atlantic western shores of the continent, has long been Africa’s most vulnerable region.

It is a vast territory in which poverty, poorly controlled borders and domestic instability are fertile breeding grounds for terrorism, organised crime and human trafficking.

As the former colonial power and key economic actor, France has taken a leading role in tackling these security challenges.

But the French, who have spent the past decade deploying large numbers of troops in the region, have been progressively thwarted by the sheer magnitude of Sahel’s problems and poor governance.

Mali experienced a coup in 2021, followed by Burkina Faso in 2022. In both cases, the military demanded the immediate withdrawal of Western forces.

However, Niger’s civilian government allowed the French and the United States to maintain bases there. Nearly 1,500 French soldiers are stationed in Niger, mainly at the Niamey air base near the nation’s capital. A further 1,000 US troops accompany them.

All anti-terrorist operations conducted by the French from Niger’s soil are now suspended. Nevertheless, France, which signed the basing agreement with deposed President Bazoum, considers that it “remains valid, since we recognise no other authority than his”, a spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry said.

The United States has adopted a similar line.

Yet, there is no doubt that the Niger coup is a blow to the French military strategy in Africa. If French troops are forced to leave, that would effectively end Western efforts to stabilise the region and substantially boost terrorist and jihadist organisations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria or the Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.

The French also stand to lose access to another significant Niger asset, uranium deposits, critical to fuelling nuclear power plants and atomic weapons production.

Orano, a French company controlled mainly by the French government, holds exploitation rights to three mines in Niger. However, only one in Arlit, in the middle of the Sahara desert, closer to the border with neighbouring Algeria than Niger’s capital, Niamey, is operational.

“No change is reported; the situation is normal,” an Orano company spokesman said on Wednesday.

And, at least for the moment, the French authorities are not worried about shortages of uranium supplies.

EDF, France’s electricity giant, claims to hold a strategic stock of uranium sufficient for at least two years of fuel consumption at its nuclear reactors.

Still, Niger accounts for a quarter of Europe’s uranium needs, and a vast newly discovered deposit estimated at nearly 200,000 tonnes of uranium – dubbed the “mine of the century” – is being readied by France for development.

If Niger’s military now excludes the French from this mega-project, the blow to the authorities in Paris will be severe.

For now, all eyes are on the ultimatum given to Niger’s military rulers by the Economic Community of West African States (Ecowas), an organisation of 15 countries located in West Africa.

The chiefs of staff of the Ecowas countries are constantly meeting in Abuja, the capital of neighbouring Nigeria, to “work on military strategy” of intervention in Niger, should the coup leaders refuse to relinquish power by the end of this week.

“It’s time for action,” said Nigerian President Bola Tinubu, the current rotating head of the organisation.

“We are ready, and as soon as we receive the order to intervene, we will do so,” said General Christopher Musa, the supreme commander of Nigeria’s armed forces.

Despite the bellicose language, there are considerable obstacles to any military intervention in Niger.

Chief among them is the danger that, if invaded, Niger could turn to Russia and its Wagner group of mercenaries, who are standing ready to prop up the junta. There is nothing Russia would like more than to see the West humiliated in yet another African country.

“All the usual ingredients for destabilisation in the Russian-African manner” are present in Niger, said France’s Foreign Minister Catherine Colonna.

Russian flags and calls for a new partnership with Russia are now increasingly evident on the streets of Niamey.