BEIJING -  United States Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen’s visit to China, which kicks off this Thursday, comes with low expectations of a significant breakthrough in bilateral relations.

But it can serve as an opportunity for further dialogue while promoting cooperation on macroeconomic issues like the global economy, observers said. 

The second American Cabinet member to visit Beijing in a month, Dr Yellen is expected to meet senior Chinese officials and address some of the US concerns, including in areas of national security.

While fiscal policy tends to have a more domestic focus, the world’s two largest economies are closely linked and would have many issues to discuss, said Associate Professor Chen Shengjun of the University of International Business and Economics in Beijing. 

At the top of the Chinese agenda would be pressing Dr Yellen on the Biden administration’s plans to regulate and possibly halt American investment in China in sensitive technology. 

“Fundamentally, there are a lot of areas that China and the US disagree on – from semiconductors, national security and even human rights – but her visit will help to continue opening up lines of communication between the economic teams of both sides,” Prof Chen told The Straits Times. 

“As two of the world’s biggest economies, both countries cannot expect to stop talking because they disagree seriously – that’s petty and has ramifications throughout the global economy.

“We won’t expect any significant breakthroughs (this time), but it’ll help the relationship not get worse, and maybe even promote further dialogue and communication,” he added. 

The US dollar has recently moved higher against the Chinese yuan, which has affected the economy, and this week’s meetings will be an opportunity for top economic officials to discuss that, said Professor Wang Jisi, the founding president of Peking University’s School of International Strategic Studies.

“This has a certain impact on the economies of the two countries, but the financial departments of both parties should have some estimates of what kind of impact it will have,” he said during a panel discussion at the World Peace Forum held in Beijing. 

China is also concerned about sanctions imposed against some 1,300 Chinese entities by the US, as well as tariffs that had been imposed by former president Donald Trump’s government but have yet to be removed, said Professor Wu Xinbo, dean of the Institute of International Studies at Fudan University. 

“These issues are not under the responsibility of Secretary Yellen, but the responsibility of Secretary of Commerce (Gina) Raimondo,” he said, adding that he hopes the latter will visit China soon for more substantive discussions. 

Chinese Commerce Minister Wang Wentao had in May visited Washington, where he and Ms Raimondo discussed trade, investment and export policies. 

Efforts are on to thaw frosty ties between Beijing and Washington following a trade war, tit-for-tat sanctions and export bans. 

Previously, Treasury secretaries and their Chinese counterparts would meet as often as once every six months through the “Strategic Economic Dialogue”. Such sessions would involve officials discussing growth outlooks. 

These meetings were suspended during the Trump administration, which imposed a raft of tariffs on China. 

Dr Yellen’s visit follows one nearly three weeks ago by Secretary of State Antony Blinken, as both sides attempt to re-engage after a series of national security and trade issues derailed bilateral relations, plunging them to the lowest point in recent history. 

US President Joe Biden has indicated that he expects to meet Chinese President Xi Jinping in the coming months. The two last met on the sidelines of the Group of 20 summit in Bali in November 2022.

During her Beijing visit from Thursday to Sunday, Dr Yellen is expected to discuss responsibly managing the relationship between the world’s two largest economies, areas of concerns and working together in addressing global challenges, said a statement from the Treasury Department. 

“We seek to secure our national security interests along with those of our allies and to protect human rights through targeted actions that are not intended to gain economic advantage,” the statement said, adding that Washington seeks a healthy economic relationship with Beijing. 

A senior Treasury official told Bloomberg that Dr Yellen is unlikely to meet Mr Xi.