BEIJING – In August 2022, the work here of an international environmental non-governmental organisation (NGO) – which had been operating in China for decades – abruptly stalled.

Then United States House Speaker Nancy Pelosi had just visited Taiwan over Beijing’s objections, and China declared that it was ceasing dialogue with the US on a range of issues from climate change to military relations.

“It was like a switch being flipped,” said a climate change activist who works for the NGO.

“Suddenly, the Chinese officials stopped responding to us,” he added, declining to be named because he was not authorised to speak with press.

His work consists of making sure both countries – the world’s biggest polluters – are on track to work together to achieve environmental protection targets.

He said things improved after talks between both sides formally resumed a few months later in the lead-up to the United Nations COP27 Summit in Egypt in November, but “overall, the situation between the US and China remains lukewarm at best”.

International NGOs and the foreign press in China say they have been finding it increasingly tough to operate in the country, as tensions continue to rise between the US and China.

Activists told The Straits Times they first felt the space tightening in 2017, when a new law forced foreign organisations to register with the Ministry of Public Security and have an official Chinese sponsor or host organisation.

The law was reportedly aimed at limiting foreign interference in what China considers its domestic affairs. Chinese officials had long argued for such a law to manage the thousands of NGOs in China, which were operating in a legally grey area.

To register, groups must now first approach a government ministry to request supervision, so that Chinese officials can vet the financial and operational details of the NGO’s work. They say that the legal change has been a bureaucratic nightmare, as Chinese ministries are often reluctant to agree to being their sponsor.

Things worsened after Mrs Pelosi visited Taiwan, because less-sensitive areas such as climate change that were previously thought of as “safe” were suddenly also treacherous.

Mrs Pelosi was the highest-ranking US official to visit Taiwan since Mr Newt Gingrich, also a former House Speaker, visited the island in 1997.

Beijing considers Taiwan to be part of its own territory, and takes retaliatory measures against foreign officials and countries that test the limits of its “one-China” principle. Mrs Pelosi’s visit, which came as ties between Beijing and Washington were hitting new lows, resulted in Beijing launching joint military exercises around Taiwan and suspending or cancelling various dialogues with the US.

“In the activism circles, it felt like there was increasingly no space to manoeuvre or even breathe,” said an activist in Beijing who works on lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) issues for an international NGO.

“For example, we have been using public health as a channel to work on gender and sexual minority issues, but what if healthcare activism is also no longer safe?”

An executive at a global non-profit whose headquarters are in the US said it has been taking steps to protect its workers in China, all local, since 2017.

This was a marked change from “the early 2000s, when we first set up, and could openly hire workers and look for locations such as office space and orphanages”.

The foundation says on its website that it has operations in China, but does not divulge any details of its employees there so as not to “draw attention from public officials”, she said.

In contrast, it provides details about its workers in other parts of the world.

Part of the foundation’s work is to raise money for children with heart conditions in the developing world who need surgery. It also runs orphanages. However, the executive declined to comment on the operations that are run in China.

“Given the US-China’s worsening ties, we do not expect things to improve any time soon. As long as the ties don’t deteriorate, we will consider ourselves very lucky,” she added.

In contrast with end-2016, when official data stated there were more than 7,000 foreign NGOs in China, there are 576 foreign NGO representative offices and 3,254 temporary activities successfully registered and filed as at Jan 1, 2020.

Almost half of the offices registered are trade-related, such as chambers of commerce, which are not usually platforms for activism.

US journalists in the country have also been hit by the fallout.

At least 18 US journalists working for outlets such as the Wall Street Journal, The New York Times and Washington Post were expelled from China in 2020 in a tit-for-tat move after former US president Donald Trump classified Chinese state media organisations as foreign missions and tightened controls on them. Washington also slashed the number of journalists permitted to work in the US at four major Chinese state-owned media outlets to 100, from 160.

In its latest report on the working conditions in the country on March 1, the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of China (FCCC), which the Chinese government does not officially recognise, noted that “though Covid-19 controls have been lifted, a bevy of state restrictions, ongoing digital surveillance, and the continued harassment of Chinese colleagues and sources mean existing challenges to true freedom of the press in China remain”.

State media China Daily and Global Times have called the FCCC annual reports a “move to discredit China”, adding that “China has always welcomed foreign media to report about the country in a comprehensive and objective way, as such reports are an important channel for foreigners to find out about China”.

But, said a Global Times editorial on March 4, “some journalists in the Western media do not have a balanced and objective view of China”.